---
layout: post
title: "Making Samba shares accessible to Apache on OS X"
date: 2010-10-03 19:29
comments: true
external-url:
categories: [Technology]
published: true
---
As a small weekend project, I've been working on a simple Python HTTP "file server" of sorts.  The basic idea is that authorized users can log in to a web interface and browse files in specific locations on my home network.  The Python script is accessed through Apache on my Mac Mini, but some of the files I need access to are on Windows boxes.  Unfortunately this presented something of a problem, as the Apache user on OS X (<code>_www</code> as of Snow Leopard) doesn't have permission to access Windows shares mounted by users.

Sounds simple enough, right?  Just <code>chmod</code> or <code>chown</code> the Windows share and go to town.  Unfortunately, this doesn't seem to work; neither <code>chown</code> or <code>chmod</code> have any effect on mounted Windows shares.  Oddly, they don't output any errors; they just don't <em>do anything.</em> The only way around this seems to be to mount the shares <em>as</em> the Apache user (or whichever user you need to have access).  Here's how to do so in Snow Leopard, with instructions modified slightly from a <a href="http://stackoverflow.com/" target="_blank">Stack Overflow</a> <a title="Stack Overflow: mount a windows smb share on OS X as so it can be accessed by 'www' user" href="http://stackoverflow.com/questions/324171/mount-a-windows-smb-share-on-os-x-as-so-it-can-be-accessed-by-www-user" target="_blank">question on the subject</a>:
<ol>
	<li>Create the mountpoint<br />
        <code>mkdir /Volumes/Mount_Name</code></li>
	<li>Set the permissions on the mount point
<pre><code>sudo chown _www:_www /Volumes/Mount_Name
sudo chmod 755 /Volumes/Mount_Name
</code></pre>
</li>
	<li>If necessary, make a symlink from your Apache documents folder to the mount point<br />
         <code>ln -s /Volumes/Mount_Name /Library/WebServer/Documents/Mount_Name</code></li>
	<li>Mount the share <strong>as the Apache user</strong><br />
        <code>sudo -u _www mount_smbfs //DOMAIN;User:Password@Host/Share /Volumes/Mount_Name</code></li>
</ol>
I doubt a great number of people will need this information as it's a strange sort of setup, but it's my hope that these instructions will save someone some time.
