---
layout: post
title: "Road Trip! Part II"
date: 2013-12-24 22:07
comments: true
categories: Personal
---

Five months ago, I [left off my last post](/entry/2013/07/30/road-trip/) having
just left Canyonlands National Park, heading further south to visit Bryce Canyon
and Zion National Parks. I had booked a motel for the evening in Panguitch,
Utah, which is a three or four hour drive from Moab. The drive there was
uneventful, with relatively little in the way of scenery. I mostly followed the
interstate, until about an hour outside of Panguitch, where I exited onto state
route 89.

Route 89 winds through scrub desert, farmland, and several very small towns
nestled between modest mountains. I arrived in Panguitch and discovered that it,
too, is very small. In contrast to Moab, though, it didn't seem to have much of
a tourist draw despite its proximity to Bryce Canyon. As a foreigner, I have to
admit that I felt some apprehension at this. Although everyone I'd met in Utah
so far had been very friendly and welcoming, a small, isolated town like
Panguitch is the kind of place where I imagined that I could encounter a
[Top Gear-esque redneck mob](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pKcJ-0bAHB4).
Granted, I wasn't driving around with a purposefully offensive slogan on my car,
nor do I really have a discernible accent, but I still felt like a pretty
obvious outsider with my Washington plates and conspicuous blue car with absurd
spoiler.  I was relieved, then, when I checked in at the New Western Motel and
was greeted at the front desk by an older Indian man (who I presume is also the
owner); it was good to see that the population of Panguitch isn't completely
homogeneous.

If you read the previous post you might recall that I had only slept for a few
hours the previous night, as I was up around 3:30am to get pictures of Delicate
Arch at night. That being the case, I was exhausted by the time I checked into
my room, so I decided to nap for a few hours before heading to Bryce Canyon. It
might have just been because I was so tired, but I distinctly recall thinking
that the bed in my motel room was among the most comfortable I had ever slept
in.

I woke up around five or six in the evening and went to grab dinner from "The
Pizza Place" in the nearby town of Tropic. Yes, it's literally just called "The
Pizza Place." It's a nice little family-run business, and the pizza was pretty
good. I couldn't help but notice that they had several copies of the Book of
Mormon available for guests to peruse. That didn't surprise me, given that I was
in Utah, but I did find it strange that most if not all of the books seemed to
be written in Danish.

I made it to the Bryce Amphitheater in Bryce Canyon National Park just in time
for sunset, and took the opportunity to walk the Rim Trail and take some
pictures. Unfortunately, as it was quickly becoming dark, I didn't have time to
go on any of the hiking trails or explore the rest of the park. I contemplated
spending another day in Panguitch and going on a horseback tour of Bryce Canyon,
but ultimately opted to leave for Zion National Park the next morning so that
I'd have more time there.<!-- more -->

{% gallery %}
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-1.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-1.jpg]: Bryce Amphitheater
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-2.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-2.jpg]: Bryce Amphitheater
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-3.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-3.jpg]: Bryce Amphitheater
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-4.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-4.jpg]: Bryce Amphitheater
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-5.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-5.jpg]: Bryce Amphitheater
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-6.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-6.jpg]: Bryce Amphitheater
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-7.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-7.jpg]: Bryce Amphitheater
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-8.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-8.jpg]: Bryce Amphitheater
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-9.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-9.jpg]: Bryce Amphitheater
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-10.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-10.jpg]: Bryce Amphitheater
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-11.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-11.jpg]: Bryce Amphitheater
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-12.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-12.jpg]: Bryce Amphitheater
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-13.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-13.jpg]: Bryce Amphitheater
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-14.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-14.jpg]: Bryce Amphitheater
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-15.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-15.jpg]: Bryce Amphitheater
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-16.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-16.jpg]: Bryce Amphitheater
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-17.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-17.jpg]: Bryce Amphitheater
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-18.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-18.jpg]: Bryce Amphitheater
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-19.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-19.jpg]: Bryce Amphitheater
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-20.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-20.jpg]: Bryce Amphitheater
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-21.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-21.jpg]: Bryce Amphitheater
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-22.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-22.jpg]: Bryce Amphitheater
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-23.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-23.jpg]: The sun sets behind the trees on the Rim Trail in Byrce Canyon
 {% endgallery %}

The next morning I made the 70-mile drive to Zion National Park. When I
arrived, I immediately knew that I'd made the right choice in prioritizing Zion
over another day at Bryce Canyon. The descent into the canyon from the eastern
entrance is nothing short of spectacular. The Checkerboard Mesa is the first
sight to greet visitors entering from the east, and it alone is a pretty
remarkable formation, but it offers only the faintest hint at what awaits.

Walls of red stone rise up on either side as the road continues its descent into
the Zion-Mt. Carmel tunnel. The long, narrow tunnel was carved right into the
side of the canyon between during the years of 1927 to 1930. Occasional openings
in the side of the tunnel offer glimpses of the valley below, but the sight when
one finally emerges on the other side is truly breathtaking. It reminded me of
the descent into Yosemite Valley, but with towering walls of red sandstone
instead of granite. As impressive as the drive is, though, it doesn't even pass
through Zion Canyon proper.

I checked into my campground, set up my tent, and planned for my first hike:
[Angels Landing](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Angels_Landing).
It was still early in the afternoon, and far too hot for a 5 mile (8km) hike
with around 1500 feet (460m) of elevation gain. Luckily, my campground was also
an RV park and inn, so it had amenities such as a pool and showers. I lounged
around the pool until later in the afternoon when the temperature started to
drop, and then, carrying my tripod, camera, and an ample supply of water, hopped
on the canyon bus.

Due to the limited area of the canyon, and to reduce environmental impact,
visitors aren't allowed to drive or park in Zion Canyon itself. Instead, the
park operates a free shuttle bus up and down the canyon, complete with narration
describing the history of the canyon and the significance of each of location it
stops at. While informative, the narration gets a bit tiring after the third or
fourth time you hear it, which makes one feel sorry for the park staff who are
subjected to it daily. On the first bus I took, a woman who I assumed to be an
off-duty park employee entertained us by reciting word for word, but in a very
sarcastic tone, several minutes of the narration.

The climb up to Angels Landing starts off with a deceptively gentle walk along
the Virgin River at the bottom of the canyon, but then quickly climbs upward
along a series of increasingly steep switchbacks. It was still hot enough out to
make the upward trek thoroughly exhausting. Thankfully, the aptly named
Refrigerator Canyon offered some respite. Encountered about half way through the
hike, the small box canyon is consistently several degrees cooler than ambient
temperatures.

At the end of Refrigerator Canyon, the trail ascends
[Walter's Wiggles](http://www.zionnational-park.com/images/album2/pages/angels-landing-ef_jpg.htm),
a long set of tight, steep switchbacks, and then emerges atop a spine of
cliff that culminates in Angels Landing itself. This is where the trail really
gets fun&mdash;or terrifying, depending on your perspective. I don't consider
myself to be particularly afraid of heights, but the view down to the valley
floor is truly dizzying, even before one reaches the top of Angels Landing. And
between the top of the of the Wiggles and the Landing, there are still hundreds
of vertical feet to climb along a twisting, rocky, extremely narrow trail where
a slip to either side means certain death. So steep is this section of trail
that much of it is spent pulling oneself upward along sections of chain that the
National Park Service has anchored into the rock. It's remarkable that
[only a handful of people have died at Angels Landing](http://www.nps.gov/zion/frequently-asked-questions-about-zions-hiking-trails.htm).
Did I mention that I was carrying a tripod and several pounds of camera
equipment the whole way up?

Arriving at the summit, though, the perilous hike proved to be more than
worthwhile as I was afforded a beautiful view of Zion Canyon. The brilliant
green foliage along the valley floor gives way to majestic orange cliffs, which
turn fiery red as the sun sinks in the distance. Words can't do it justice, and
frankly, neither can my photography, but I tried nevertheless:

{% gallery %}
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-24.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-24.jpg]: Zion Canyon
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-25.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-25.jpg]: Zion Canyon
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-26.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-26.jpg]: Zion Canyon from low on the Angels Landing trail
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-27.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-27.jpg]: Switchbacks along the lower part of the Angels Landing trail, before Refrigerator Canyon
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-28.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-28.jpg]: An overhang along the Angels Landing trail
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-29.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-29.jpg]: The trail through Refrigerator Canyon, from inside a small fissure in the rock
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-30.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-30.jpg]: I can't read this, or even figure out what language it is (obvious guesses seem to result in gibberish when machine-translated), but I assume it's in memory of someone who fell from here and died.
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-34.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-34.jpg]: Another memorial, again presumably for someone who died at Angels Landing
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-31.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-31.jpg]: The view east from above Walter's Wiggles
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-32.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-32.jpg]: Looking south toward Angels Landing. This angle obscures how steep it really is.
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-33.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-33.jpg]: Further along the trail, looking back to the north
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-35.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-35.jpg]: Looking east at the valley floor
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-36.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-36.jpg]: Me atop Angels Landing
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-37.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-37.jpg]: Zion Canyon, looking south from Angels Landing
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-38.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-38.jpg]: Zion Canyon, looking north from Angels Landing
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-39.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-39.jpg]: Zion Canyon, looking north
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-40.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-40.jpg]: Zion Canyon, looking south
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-41.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-41.jpg]: Looking further down the canyon. It was a bit hazy.
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-42.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-42.jpg]: A telephoto image of the valley floor from Angels Landing. I've never been to Australia, but the red stone and foliage made me feel very much as though I was there. Even the asphalt in the road is red.
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-43.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-43.jpg]: Looking north at the Temple of Sinawava
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-44.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-44.jpg]: Looking north
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-45.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-45.jpg]: Another shot of the Temple of Sinawava
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-46.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-46.jpg]: Looking back at the trail to Angels Landing. This gives a better idea of how treacherous it can be.
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-47.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-47.jpg]: Looking back at the trail to Angels Landing.
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-48.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-48.jpg]: Zion Canyon, from where the trail finally emerges at the top of Angels Landing.
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-49.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-49.jpg]: Zion Canyon, looking north, with the trail in the lower left.
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-50.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-50.jpg]: A wider shot of the trail.
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-51.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-51.jpg]: Another wide shot of the trail. Again, this gives an idea of how steep and narrow it is.
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-52.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-52.jpg]: A panorama of Zion Canyon from the end of the Angels Landing trail.
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-53.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-53.jpg]: Looking down at one of the shuttle stops. It's a long drop!
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-54.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-54.jpg]: It's even steeper than it looks.
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-55.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-55.jpg]: A vertical panorama of the trail.
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-56.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-56.jpg]: Zion Canyon
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-57.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-57.jpg]: Another vertical panorama.
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-58.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-58.jpg]: This was one of the most difficult sections of the trail, I think.
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-59.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-59.jpg]: A panorama looking east from the trail.
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-60.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-60.jpg]: Another section of trail which brings hikers frighteningly close to the precipice
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-61.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-61.jpg]: Looking back south, with Refrigerator Canyon on the right
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-62.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-62.jpg]: Vertical panorama from the overhang area before Refrigerator Canyon
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-63.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-63.jpg]: Sunset over Zion Canyon
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-64.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-64.jpg]: Sunset over Zion Canyon
{% endgallery %}

Later that evening, I drove back along the Zion-Mount Carmel highway, stopping a
few miles from the east entrance to try to get a few pictures of the stars above
the canyon. That didn't work out as well as I had hoped, but I did see another
scorpion!

{% gallery %}
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-65.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-65.jpg]: Scorpion!
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-66.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-66.jpg]: A rather disappointing photo of the stars above Zion.
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-67.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-67.jpg]: A rather disappointing photo of the stars above Zion.
{% endgallery %}

The next day, I set off to hike
[The Narrows](http://www.nps.gov/zion/planyourvisit/thenarrows.htm), a 16-mile
(25km) long, 20-30 foot (6-9m) wide, 2000 foot (610m) deep gorge carved by the
Virgin River.  What makes The Narrows unique is that there is no hiking trail at
all: the hike is actually undertaken _in the river_. As such, it can vary
greatly in difficulty depending on the season; during months where the water
level is high, it can be all but impassable, whereas in the summer it tends to
be relatively easy with water ranging from ankle-deep to waist-deep. As I was in
Zion during July, the water level was quite low.

Even so, such an atypical hike requires extra preparation, so I walked across
the road from my campground to the
[Zion Adventure Company](http://www.zionadventures.com/) and picked up the
required gear.  This consisted of a pair of canyoneering shoes and neoprene
socks, a walking stick, and a waterproof bag for my camera equipment. I ended up
finding the walking stick to be more of a burden than a boon, and the waterproof
bag wasn't really necessary either given the low water levels, but it's better
to be safe than sorry with expensive camera equipment.

A word of advice for anyone planning to hike The Narrows, though: if you rent
canyoneering shoes, make sure they fit _with plenty of room to spare._ They'll
shrink in the water, so shoes that are a comfortable fit at the beginning of the
day can become very, very uncomfortable after several hours in the river. I
learned this the hard way: by the end of my hike, I could barely walk, and much
of the toenail on my big toe on my left foot ended up turning black and falling
off. Five months later, it's finally _almost_ completely grown back.

Aside from that slightly painful mistake on my part, though, The Narrows proved
to be a truly amazing hike, unlike anything I've ever done before. Looking
thousands of feet up the sheer canyon wall offers a new perspective on the
enormity of Zion Canyon, and there's something new to see in every corner of the
canyon: foliage sprouting out of the ancient stone, birds circling overhead,
gurgling springs pouring from cracks in the walls, and all around, the
ever-changing Virgin River.

There are two ways to hike The Narrows. Starting from the top down, it's a
16-mile hike, which the National Park Service estimates will take about 12
hours. Unfortunately, this route requires two permits, one of which is very
sought-after and therefore difficult to get. Not having either permit, I was
left with the bottom-up hike, which is a 10-mile (16km) round trip if you go all
the way to the mandatory turn-around point at Big Spring, which I did. I also
took the optional side-trip into Orderville Canyon, which added another mile to
the hike for a total of around 11 miles (18km).

The first few miles of the hike were very busy, probably owing both to how
spectacular the views on the hike are, and how refreshing the cool waters of the
Virgin River are on hot days in Zion. Luckily, most people seem to stop and turn
back around Orderville Canyon, which is about 2.5 miles into the hike. After the
Orderville fork, the main canyon becomes very narrow in spots&mdash;hence the
name. Of course, this also means that the river is much deeper in a few areas.
Even with the low water levels, I had to wade through several waist-deep pools
with my camera bag held above my head.  There was even one pool deep enough that
I would have had to swim across it, but I managed to find an alternate route by
sneaking behind a colossal boulder in the river.

After five miles of walking upstream, I reached Big Spring, which is exactly
what it sounds like: a large spring pouring into the river from the canyon wall.
With the water low, it's also a perfect spot to stop and relax. There's a nice
sandbar to sit on, and the canyon is wide enough that the afternoon sun bakes
the sandbar to a pleasantly warm temperature. There's also a fairly deep pool
in the river opposite the sandbar, adjacent to the spring itself; this I found
to be perfect for diving and swimming, and a nice way to cool off when the sun
became too warm.

I met a group of students and their football coach from a Mormon school in Provo
(if I recall correctly) at the spring. They were all very friendly, and I
encountered them again several times on my way back down the canyon, so we ended
up chatting about various subjects. Learning that I'm from Canada but working in
the US, they were interested to hear how Canadians can acquire US work visas.
This is something I've been asked about several times; it seems that some
aspects of the US immigration system are almost universally unknown. I don't
mean that to sound judgmental, though&mdash;it's merely an (I think) interesting
observation. Most people have little reason to know, and I can't claim to
understand in detail how immigration works in Canada.

They also mentioned that they knew someone who was currently on a mission in
Edmonton, which is where I went to school. I was a little surprised to learn
that Mormons from the US actually go on missions in Canada; I guess I had
pictured missions primarily taking place in poorer countries where the
missionaries can help the locals with construction, education, health care, and
so forth, in addition to their evangelism. I didn't really ask about it, though;
mostly we talked about how mind-numbingly cold winters in Edmonton can be.

On my way back down the river, I stopped briefly in Orderville Canyon. It's a
short detour, and well worth it. Orderville is narrower than the main canyon,
and a bit more challenging to hike in some spots. After one of the first several
bends, there's a long straight stretch with a clear view to a jutting peak above
the canyon, which offers a phenomenal sense of the scale of the stone around
you. Unfortunately, I couldn't effectively photograph this. At the turn-around
point, Orderville rewards those who take the time to hike it with a small
waterfall.

{% gallery %}
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-68.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-68.jpg]: The Narrows
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-69.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-69.jpg]: Big Spring
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-70.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-70.jpg]: Sitting atop Big Spring
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-71.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-71.jpg]: The sandbar at Big Spring
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-72.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-72.jpg]: Big Spring
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-73.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-73.jpg]: Emerald waters at Big Spring
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-74.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-74.jpg]: Emerald waters at Big Spring
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-75.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-75.jpg]: Emerald waters at Big Spring
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-76.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-76.jpg]: Emerald waters at Big Spring
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-77.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-77.jpg]: The Narrows
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-78.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-78.jpg]: The Narrows
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-79.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-79.jpg]: The Narrows
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-80.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-80.jpg]: The Narrows
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-81.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-81.jpg]: The Narrows
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-82.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-82.jpg]: The Narrows
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-83.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-83.jpg]: The Narrows
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-84.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-84.jpg]: The Narrows
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-85.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-85.jpg]: The Narrows
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-86.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-86.jpg]: Waterfall in Orderville Canyon
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-87.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-87.jpg]: Waterfall in Orderville Canyon
{% endgallery %}

Sadly, I only had a couple days to spend in Zion, so the next day I packed up my
tent and started the long drive back to Redmond. The fastest route would have
been to back north through Idaho, essentially following the same route I'd
arrived on. I wanted the drive to be interesting, though, so instead I headed
southwest to St. George, Utah, then through the northwest corner of Arizona and
on to Las Vegas.
([There's a map in my first post.](/entry/2013/07/30/road-trip/)) From there, I
drove northwest along the California-Nevada border. The GPS in my car can be
extremely uncooperative at times, particularly where seasonal roads are
involved, so I ended up following an unnecessarily circuitous route, crossing
the state border no fewer than 5 times. I did find some beautiful roads, though;
in particular, the Robert M. Jackson Memorial Highway (California State Route
89) near Leviathan Peak. I reached the peak just as the sun was setting, and the
view was gorgeous.

I stayed the night in South Lake Tahoe. It was already night when I arrived, and
I didn't have much time to explore the next day given how much driving I still
had left to do. Still, driving around the lake re-emphasized the beauty of the
area; Lake Tahoe now has a high spot on my list of places that I have to visit.

From Tahoe, I made another detour back into Nevada, through Carson City, and
then back through California up to Oregon. Northern California reminds me quite
a bit of the southern interior of British Columbia, but other than that, there
wasn't much to see. As for the drive through Oregon, the only thing I want to
say about it is that south-central Oregon doesn't seem to be very interesting
(except for Crater Lake, which I didn't get a chance to stop at), and that speed
limits in the state are far too low. 55mph on the interstate makes for a long,
boring drive.

{% gallery %}
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-88.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-88.jpg]: Somewhere outside the lonely Esmerelda County line / The question of my heart came to my mind - The Killers
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-89.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-89.jpg]: Somewhere east of the Sierra Nevada range
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-90.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-90.jpg]: Somewhere east of the Sierra Nevada range
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-91.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-91.jpg]: Sunset on Leviathan Peak
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-92.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-92.jpg]: Sunset on Leviathan Peak
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-93.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-93.jpg]: Sunset on Leviathan Peak
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-94.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-94.jpg]: Sunset on Leviathan Peak
/images/utah/utah-part2-album-95.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part2-thumb-95.jpg]: Sunset on Leviathan Peak
{% endgallery %}

So, that's it! I hope you've enjoyed reading about my adventures. I try to do at
least one long road trip each year, so if you have suggestions about where I
should go next year, let me know.
