---
layout: post
title: "Road Trip! Part I"
date: 2013-07-21 21:44
comments: true
categories: Personal
published: false
---

I try to go on at least one long road trip every year. I'm one of those people
who actually enjoy driving, even for absurdly long stretches of time; anything
up to 12 hours per day on the road is fairly comfortable for me, and even beyond
that I don't find long trips all that tiring. I'd much, much rather drive 12
hours in my car than take a two hour plane trip.

I love visiting new places. I've lived in the United States for just over a year
now, and one of the things I love about this country is how vast it is and how
many opportunities it presents for exploration. Canada is just slightly larger
than the United States, but it's also very sparsely populated north of, say,
Edmonton, so practically speaking I think one can explore much more of the
States while still maintaining access to the comforts of civilization.

My new car was also begging to be broken in on a long road trip. Although I had
a bit of a [rocky start with it](/entry/2013/06/09/the-subaru-saga/), all of the
issues have now been sorted out (or at least as sorted out as they'll ever be),
so it offered another compelling reason to take a long trip. So it was that I
booked the 5th to 12th of July off of work and embarked on a 3,378 mile
(5,436km) drive from Redmond, Washington through Oregon, Idaho, and Nevada to
Utah, and then back home through Arizona, Nevada, California and Oregon. Here's
a map of my travels:

<iframe style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; display: block;"
width="640" height="480" frameborder="0" scrolling="no"
src="https://www.google.com/maps?f=d&amp;source=s_d&amp;saddr=Redmond,+WA&amp;daddr=Ritzville,+WA+to:Palouse+Falls+State+Park,+LaCrosse,+WA+to:Haines,+OR+to:Ontario,+OR+to:Wendover,+UT+to:Salt+Lake+City,+UT+to:Price,+UT+to:Moab,+UT+to:Panguitch,+UT+to:Bryce+Canyon,+UT+to:Springdale,+UT+to:Las+Vegas,+NV+to:Dyer,+NV+to:Benton,+CA+to:Bishop,+CA+to:Markleeville,+CA+to:South+Lake+Tahoe,+CA+to:Carson+City,+NV+to:Susanville,+CA+to:Canby,+CA+to:Klamath+Falls,+Klamath,+Oregon+to:Chemult,+OR+to:Eugene,+OR+to:Redmond,+WA&amp;hl=en&amp;geocode=FYRy1wId2JK4-Ckj7gAgrQyQVDHyBNjF6pADXg%3BFUwbzwIdOarx-Cmb_TdgfN6eVDGKuOf1VucGOQ%3BFXwQyAIdFwz0-CkXG2oYq06fVDGw6S4EkKK6_g%3BFa5LrQIdc2X4-Clr08thkZOkVDGAPiLIJ8MbBw%3BFbjKnwIdhkkH-SlhZ8uqq4-vVDHFV5TAbv6xQg%3BFYCZbQId-uwz-SlbggcPCiOsgDFAv8ZD7CXJhw%3BFcv1bQIdma1U-SntMdGIlD1ShzHKMU1IoLdTWw%3BFTI9XAIdpSll-Sk_ePOC87dOhzHkJtf6O7z9QQ%3BFQSVTAId8WZ4-SmNLbia5eFHhzEtxNXxerEyCw%3BFSMhQQIdzF1M-SlZsMjUUlW1gDGPfBr3uWtgAg%3BFZwpPgId8XRQ-SltTDjuH2k1hzFi_Ul6bDecdQ%3BFQd1NwIdacdD-SnxHlELNo3KgDF6CLeupWSy2Q%3BFdYQJwIdMJoi-SnRffWkgre-gDGjebPV5tXMOg%3BFfPBPgIdIXT2-Clj39bFIHq-gDEMJ1Cg5SDCsw%3BFdsSQQIdIzHw-CkBpiOK-e-9gDFAoqtCLJMezg%3BFVQfOgIdGm_x-CkHZKaeARa-gDEWiemVTR7NEw%3BFVtrTgIdnU7c-Ck_J4MkUt2ZgDGZ0jQuDCeK4A%3BFRYtUgIdHUvZ-CnhT6XuiYWZgDGOkSP7Ri8b3Q%3BFZaXVQIdlX7c-ClxtN74oQqZgDEoOOK9gmyc9w%3BFRy0aAIdMvvO-Cnjvjba6nOdgDFu6A8iyUwHSQ%3BFcNheAIdnKrL-Cm9G9OwH3bMVDFsdmDifBnJjQ%3BFeNMhAIdWsK9-CnjDvJoWdTIVDEml7ko9X-N9A%3BFYZukwId7r29-ClVjg3U4LDHVDGC_tGKBsUjTQ%3BFWUuoAIdXtip-CkZGVCssBnBVDFNiUNKiWHsVw%3BFYRy1wId2JK4-Ckj7gAgrQyQVDHyBNjF6pADXg&amp;aq=&amp;sll=47.116869,-118.344212&amp;sspn=0.070324,0.154324&amp;mra=ls&amp;ie=UTF8&amp;t=m&amp;ll=41.902277,-116.323242&amp;spn=15.68979,28.125&amp;z=5&amp;output=embed"></iframe>
<div style="margin-right: auto; margin-left: auto; text-align: center;">
<small><a
href="https://www.google.com/maps?f=d&amp;source=embed&amp;saddr=Redmond,+WA&amp;daddr=Ritzville,+WA+to:Palouse+Falls+State+Park,+LaCrosse,+WA+to:Haines,+OR+to:Ontario,+OR+to:Wendover,+UT+to:Salt+Lake+City,+UT+to:Price,+UT+to:Moab,+UT+to:Panguitch,+UT+to:Bryce+Canyon,+UT+to:Springdale,+UT+to:Las+Vegas,+NV+to:Dyer,+NV+to:Benton,+CA+to:Bishop,+CA+to:Markleeville,+CA+to:South+Lake+Tahoe,+CA+to:Carson+City,+NV+to:Susanville,+CA+to:Canby,+CA+to:Klamath+Falls,+Klamath,+Oregon+to:Chemult,+OR+to:Eugene,+OR+to:Redmond,+WA&amp;hl=en&amp;geocode=FYRy1wId2JK4-Ckj7gAgrQyQVDHyBNjF6pADXg%3BFUwbzwIdOarx-Cmb_TdgfN6eVDGKuOf1VucGOQ%3BFXwQyAIdFwz0-CkXG2oYq06fVDGw6S4EkKK6_g%3BFa5LrQIdc2X4-Clr08thkZOkVDGAPiLIJ8MbBw%3BFbjKnwIdhkkH-SlhZ8uqq4-vVDHFV5TAbv6xQg%3BFYCZbQId-uwz-SlbggcPCiOsgDFAv8ZD7CXJhw%3BFcv1bQIdma1U-SntMdGIlD1ShzHKMU1IoLdTWw%3BFTI9XAIdpSll-Sk_ePOC87dOhzHkJtf6O7z9QQ%3BFQSVTAId8WZ4-SmNLbia5eFHhzEtxNXxerEyCw%3BFSMhQQIdzF1M-SlZsMjUUlW1gDGPfBr3uWtgAg%3BFZwpPgId8XRQ-SltTDjuH2k1hzFi_Ul6bDecdQ%3BFQd1NwIdacdD-SnxHlELNo3KgDF6CLeupWSy2Q%3BFdYQJwIdMJoi-SnRffWkgre-gDGjebPV5tXMOg%3BFfPBPgIdIXT2-Clj39bFIHq-gDEMJ1Cg5SDCsw%3BFdsSQQIdIzHw-CkBpiOK-e-9gDFAoqtCLJMezg%3BFVQfOgIdGm_x-CkHZKaeARa-gDEWiemVTR7NEw%3BFVtrTgIdnU7c-Ck_J4MkUt2ZgDGZ0jQuDCeK4A%3BFRYtUgIdHUvZ-CnhT6XuiYWZgDGOkSP7Ri8b3Q%3BFZaXVQIdlX7c-ClxtN74oQqZgDEoOOK9gmyc9w%3BFRy0aAIdMvvO-Cnjvjba6nOdgDFu6A8iyUwHSQ%3BFcNheAIdnKrL-Cm9G9OwH3bMVDFsdmDifBnJjQ%3BFeNMhAIdWsK9-CnjDvJoWdTIVDEml7ko9X-N9A%3BFYZukwId7r29-ClVjg3U4LDHVDGC_tGKBsUjTQ%3BFWUuoAIdXtip-CkZGVCssBnBVDFNiUNKiWHsVw%3BFYRy1wId2JK4-Ckj7gAgrQyQVDHyBNjF6pADXg&amp;aq=&amp;sll=47.116869,-118.344212&amp;sspn=0.070324,0.154324&amp;mra=ls&amp;ie=UTF8&amp;t=m&amp;ll=41.902277,-116.323242&amp;spn=15.68979,28.125&amp;z=5"
style="color:#0000FF;text-align:center">View Larger Map</a></small>
</div>

The first couple days of my trip were uneventful and consisted mostly of a lot
of driving. I took the scenic route through Washington and stopped to check out
the I-90 Vantage Bridge over the Columbia River near the Ginkgo State Petrified
Forest, as well as Palouse Falls in the southeast. I didn't actually get off the
freeway at the Petrified Forest, but from what I could see, it didn't seem to
live up to its name. I didn't see any trees, or indeed any wood, petrified or
not. I'm not sure how a bunch of sand and scrub grass qualify as a forest. On
the bright side, the view from the rest area on the I-90 east of the river was
pretty spectacular.

Palouse Falls was a lot more impressive. Depending on conditions, the falls are
up to 200 feet (61 metres) high. Some crazy person named Tyler Bradt recently
[survived going over the falls in a kayak](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mrveNdW_sj0)&mdash;uninjured,
even! The view from the state park campground isn't ideal, but I didn't have
time to find a way down to the river and back up, so I continued on to Haines,
Oregon, where I caught some decent Fourth of July fireworks, and then spent the
night in Ontario, Oregon.

{% gallery %}
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-1.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-1.jpg]: Vantage Bridge rest area
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-2.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-2.jpg]: Vantage Bridge rest area
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-3.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-3.jpg]: Iron horses at the Vantage Bridge rest area
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-4.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-4.jpg]: Iron horses at the Vantage Bridge rest area

/images/utah/utah-part1-album-5.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-5.jpg]: Iron horses at the Vantage Bridge rest area

/images/utah/utah-part1-album-6.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-6.jpg]: Iron horses at the Vantage Bridge rest area

/images/utah/utah-part1-album-7.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-7.jpg]: Palouse Falls State Park, WA. I didn't see any rattlesnakes.
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-8.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-8.jpg]: Palouse Falls
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-9.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-9.jpg]: Palouse Falls
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-10.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-10.jpg]: Palouse Falls
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-11.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-11.jpg]: Palouse Falls
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-12.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-12.jpg]: Palouse Falls
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-13.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-13.jpg]: A ground squirrel (I think) at Palouse Falls State Park
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-14.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-14.jpg]: Palouse Falls
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-15.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-15.jpg]: Sunset somewhere in Oregon
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-16.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-16.jpg]: Sunset somewhere in Oregon
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-17.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-17.jpg]: Fourth of July fireworks in Haines, Oregon
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-18.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-18.jpg]: Fourth of July fireworks in Haines, Oregon
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-19.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-19.jpg]: Fourth of July fireworks in Haines, Oregon
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-20.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-20.jpg]: Fourth of July fireworks in Haines, Oregon
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-21.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-21.jpg]: Fourth of July fireworks in Haines, Oregon
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-22.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-22.jpg]: Fourth of July fireworks in Haines, Oregon
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-23.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-23.jpg]: Fourth of July fireworks in Haines, Oregon
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-24.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-24.jpg]: Fourth of July fireworks in Haines, Oregon
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-25.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-25.jpg]: Fourth of July fireworks in Haines, Oregon
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-26.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-26.jpg]: Fourth of July fireworks in Haines, Oregon
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-27.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-27.jpg]: Fourth of July fireworks in Haines, Oregon
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-28.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-28.jpg]: Fourth of July fireworks in Haines, Oregon
{% endgallery %}

On the second day I drove through Idaho, Nevada and Utah. The tag line on
Idaho's license plates is "Scenic Idaho," and while I don't doubt that it's true
of some parts of the state, it's probably not referring to the southwestern bit
of the state. Other than some cool gorges, there wasn't much to see. I stopped
at Malad Gorge State Park to take a few photos, and then continued on to
Wendover, Utah, where the Bonneville Salt Flats are located.

I was looking forward to driving on the salt flats and trying to hit my car's
top speed of 158mph (254km/h), but unfortunately it had been raining before I
arrived and the flats were covered in a thin layer of water. I drove around a
little bit anyway to put my car's AWD system to the test, but I didn't go very
fast or venture very far from the paved road&mdash;it's not recommended to drive
on the salt flats when they're flooded as it becomes very easy to get stuck,
apparently in some cases to the point that your vehicle becomes unrecoverable.
I'll have to go back to the salt flats another time when they're dry, but at any
rate, they were still very pretty and it was fun to get my car a bit dirty.

I drove through Salt Lake City, which is absolutely beautiful. As I drove in
from the west, the sunset painted the mountains to the east of the city
brilliant red, and a thunderstorm in Provo to the south periodically lit the sky
with flashes of lighting. Sadly, I wasn't able to find a vantage point to get
any pictures of this, and as it was starting to get dark I was short on time. I
stopped for dinner and then continued on to Price, Utah, where I spent the
night.

{% gallery %}
/images/utah-part1-album-29.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-29.jpg]: Malad Gorge State Park, ID
/images/utah-part1-album-30.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-30.jpg]: Malad Gorge State Park, ID
/images/utah-part1-album-31.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-31.jpg]: Malad Gorge State Park, ID
/images/utah-part1-album-32.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-32.jpg]: Malad Gorge State Park, ID
/images/utah-part1-album-33.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-33.jpg]: Malad Gorge State Park, ID
/images/utah-part1-album-34.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-34.jpg]: Malad Gorge State Park, ID
/images/utah-part1-album-35.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-35.jpg]: Malad Gorge State Park, ID
/images/utah-part1-album-36.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-36.jpg]: Malad Gorge State Park, ID
/images/utah-part1-album-37.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-37.jpg]: Bonneville Salt Flats, UT
/images/utah-part1-album-38.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-38.jpg]: Bonneville Salt Flats, UT
/images/utah-part1-album-39.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-39.jpg]: Bonneville Salt Flats, UT
/images/utah-part1-album-40.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-40.jpg]: Bonneville Salt Flats, UT
/images/utah-part1-album-41.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-41.jpg]: Bonneville Salt Flats, UT
/images/utah-part1-album-42.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-42.jpg]: Bonneville Salt Flats, UT
/images/utah-part1-album-43.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-43.jpg]: Bonneville Salt Flats, UT
/images/utah-part1-album-44.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-44.jpg]: Bonneville Salt Flats, UT
/images/utah-part1-album-45.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-45.jpg]: Bonneville Salt Flats, UT
/images/utah-part1-album-46.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-46.jpg]: Bonneville Salt Flats, UT
/images/utah-part1-album-47.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-47.jpg]: Bonneville Salt Flats, UT
/images/utah-part1-album-48.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-48.jpg]: Bonneville Salt Flats, UT
{% endgallery %}

The third day of my trip was Saturday, the 6th of July, and I arrived in Moab,
Utah around noon, where it was already over 100&deg;F (38&deg;C). I checked into
my campsite and explored the town briefly. I didn't feel much like doing any
hiking in the oppressive heat, but it showed no signs of letting up before dusk,
so I bought a bunch of water and headed to Arches National Park.

Arches is remarkably beautiful. Of all the places I visited on my trip, it was
second only to Zion. Even if I had gone to Zion first, Arches still would have
been amazing, but as I hadn't been to Zion yet it was truly awe inspiring. The
scenic drive through the park alone is impressive, but there are many arches to
see, and most require only relatively short hikes to get to. That said, for
someone from a northern climate such as myself, a 2 mile hike in 100-degree heat
is a lot harder than one might expect.

I started with Landscape Arch and tried to continue on to Double O Arch, but
between the extreme heat and a harsh wind that coated my face, eyes, mouth and
camera with orange-red sand, I decided to turn back part way there; with so many
other arches to see, I didn't want to expend too much effort on the first few. I
stopped at Pine Tree Arch and Tunnel Arch on the way back. I then made the short
hikes to Skyline Arch and Sand Dune Arch, the latter of which is one of the most
picturesque arches in the park, in my opinion. Being in a canyon, the soft sand
around the arch is also delightfully cool on a hot day. Were it not so busy, it
would be the perfect place for a nap.

Finally, with sunset coming on, I hiked up to Delicate Arch. I waited until the
sun had gone down to try to get some long exposures, but I was mostly
unsuccessful, partly for lack of skill and partly because I didn't have all of
the equipment I needed. Most importantly, I didn't have a remote shutter
trigger, which meant I could only take long exposures on a timer, limiting me to
a maximum exposure length of 30 seconds. I resolved to come back again to try to
get some night time and sunrise shots after buying a remote shutter trigger.

{% gallery %}
/images/utah-part1-album-49.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-49.jpg]: Just outside of Arches National Park, UT
/images/utah-part1-album-50.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-50.jpg]: Just outside of Arches National Park, UT
/images/utah-part1-album-51.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-51.jpg]: Just outside of Arches National Park, UT
/images/utah-part1-album-52.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-52.jpg]: The picnic area near the Landscape Arch trailhead
/images/utah-part1-album-53.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-53.jpg]: The picnic area near the Landscape Arch trailhead
/images/utah-part1-album-54.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-54.jpg]: Stone formations along the Landscape Arch trail
/images/utah-part1-album-55.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-55.jpg]: Along the Landscape Arch trail
/images/utah-part1-album-56.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-56.jpg]: Soft orange-red sand in a narrow canyon along the Landscape Arch trail
/images/utah-part1-album-57.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-57.jpg]: A cactus! It's a novelty for me to see them growing in the wild
/images/utah-part1-album-58.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-58.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-59.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-59.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-60.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-60.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-61.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-61.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-62.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-62.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-63.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-63.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-64.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-64.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-65.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-65.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-66.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-66.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-67.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-67.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-68.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-68.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-69.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-69.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-70.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-70.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-71.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-71.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-72.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-72.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-73.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-73.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-74.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-74.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-75.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-75.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-76.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-76.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-77.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-77.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-78.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-78.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-79.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-79.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-80.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-80.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-81.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-81.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-82.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-82.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-83.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-83.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-84.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-84.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-85.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-85.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-86.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-86.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-87.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-87.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-88.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-88.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-89.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-89.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-90.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-90.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-91.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-91.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-92.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-92.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-93.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-93.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-94.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-94.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-95.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-95.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-96.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-96.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-97.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-97.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-98.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-98.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-99.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-99.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-100.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-100.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-101.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-101.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-102.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-102.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-103.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-103.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-104.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-104.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-105.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-105.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-106.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-106.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-107.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-107.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-108.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-108.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-109.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-109.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-110.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-110.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-111.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-111.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-112.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-112.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-113.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-113.jpg]:
/images/utah-part1-album-114.jpg[/images/utah-part1-thumb-114.jpg]:
{% endgallery %}

Sunday was just as crushingly hot as Saturday had been (and, indeed, as the
entire next week would be). To cool down during the hottest part of the day, I
took a trip up the Colorado River with [Moab Jett](http://www.moabjett.com/). I
didn't find the scenery all that remarkable, but the trip was nevertheless a lot
of fun and very refreshingly cool. Because it is a jet boat with no external
propeller, by maintaining a high rate of speed the boat is able to skim over
water only a few inches deep, and at various points on the tour the captain puts
the boat into a spin, soaking everyone on board with refreshing river water. In
retrospect, I could easily have brought my phone along in a couple ZipLoc bags
for photos, but I wasn't sure just how wet the tour would be at the time; hence,
there are no photos.

After the jet boat tour I decided to check out Dead Horse Point State Park. I
should mention at this point that I had been using my car's built-in GPS to
navigate throughout the trip. It has a couple nice features such as the ability
to input multiple waypoints on the way to a destination, but other than that,
it's pretty bad and is one of my few significant complaints about the car. It
does a poor job of choosing optimal routes relative to software like Bing,
Google or Apple Maps, and is abysmal at estimating how long a drive will take.
And, as I discovered, it also has a pretty broad definition of what qualifies as
a road.

Mapping a route from Moab to Dead Horse Point, I was presented with two options,
and I chose the alternate route which I thought would be a more scenic drive.
And indeed it was&mdash;but it also turned out to traverse Long Canyon Road, a
somewhat steep and rocky 4x4 trail from the Colorado River basin up to the Dead
Horse Point mesa. There are settings in the GPS to enable or disable routing
through major highways and toll roads, so I'm surprised that there's no way to
filter out dirt roads (and that such an option isn't turned on by default), but
I wasn't actually bothered about it taking me on a 4x4 trail; I figured it would
be another good chance to try out my Subaru AWD.

The clearance of my car is too low for serious offroading, and my "performance"
street tires don't have the grip necessary for steep sandy slopes, but
nevertheless my car performed admirably. I saw a few trucks and SUVs on the
trail, but I didn't encounter any other cars. I drove up to just beyond  the
giant fallen rock before Pucker Pass, at which point the road was fairly steep
and covered in extremely soft sand which afforded my tires almost no traction. I
think I probably could have made it through and continued to the end of the
trail, but as I was alone, dozen of miles from the nearest city, and with no
cellular reception, I didn't want to push my luck, so I turned around and went
back down the canyon and back to the interstate. (I feel like I'm letting Subaru
owners down by admitting that, but better safe than sorry!)

The view of the Colorado River from Dead Horse Point is well worth the drive,
but once you've seen it, there's not much else to do in the state park, so I
didn't spend too long there. As I was leaving, a beautiful but ephemeral rainbow
presented itself to the east, punctuated by flashes of lightning from a storm
that had  rolled in to the east of Moab. Sadly I couldn't get any decent
pictures of this.

[photos here]

Earlier in the day I had picked up a remote shutter trigger for my camera from a
small photography store in Moab, so with my resolution to return to Delicate
Arch for sunrise in mind, I went to bed as early as the heat would allow. I woke
up around 3:30am on Monday and drove back out to Arches. Equipped with a
flashlight, my camera and tripod, and my new shutter trigger, I hiked up to the
arch in complete darkness and waited for the sun to rise.

I actually arrived much earlier than I needed to for sunrise, because I had been
hoping to get some photos of the arch with stars behind it. Unfortunately this
is where I discovered another piece of equipment my photography kit is lacking.
Obviously auto-focus doesn't work in low light, let alone complete darkness, but
I discovered that it's also nearly impossible to correctly manually focus on an
object for a long exposure when you can't actually _see the object._ I thought I
might be able to accomplish this by trial and error, but doing so turned out to
be time consuming and unreliable.

I later did some searching and discovered that one of the preferred solutions to
this problem is to carry a laser pointer with one's photographic equipment. By
shining the laser on the object you want to focus on, you'll have a small,
bright point, and you'll know that your image is in focus when that point is
readily visible through the viewfinder. While I'm on the subject of photography,
I also learned that on lenses with optical image stabilization, the
stabilization must be turned off for long exposures, or fine movements in the
stabilization mechanism will result in a blurry image.

Anyway, once the sun came up I was able to get some reasonably nice photos,
although I was somewhat compositionally limited by the swarm of people who had
arrived around 6am. Now that I could see where I was going, I took the
opportunity to explore the natural stone amphitheatre below the arch, as well as
the jutting outcropping of rock to the south. Here I found a number of lizards
warming themselves in the morning sun.

Returning from Arches, I made a brief stop in Canyonlands National Park to see
the Mesa Arch. Canyonlands is a very big park, which makes it quite time
consuming to explore. I was eager to move on to Bryce Canyon and Zion, so after
seeing the Mesa Arch (which is very impressive and well worth going to
Canyonlands for), I decided to start driving to Panguitch, where I'd check out
Bryce Canyon and spend the night. I'll save the rest for part II, as Bryce
Canyon and Zion National Parks were even more spectacular than Arches and
Canyonlands, and are more than deserving of their own post.

[photos here]
