---
layout: post
title: "Road Trip! Part I"
date: 2013-07-30 2:58
comments: true
categories: Personal
---

I love visiting new places. I've lived in the United States for just over a year
now, and one of my favourite things about this country is how vast it is and how
many opportunities it presents for exploration. Canada is just slightly larger
than the United States, but it's also very sparsely populated north of, say,
Edmonton, so practically speaking I think one can explore much more of the
States while still maintaining access to the comforts of civilization.

To that end, I try to go on at least one long road trip every year. I'm also one
of those people who actually enjoy driving, even for absurdly long stretches of
time; anything up to 12 hours per day on the road is fairly comfortable for me,
and even beyond that I don't find long trips all that tiring. I'd much, much
rather drive 12 hours in my car than take a two hour plane trip.

My new car was also begging to be broken in on a long road trip. Although I had
a bit of a [rocky start with it](/entry/2013/06/09/the-subaru-saga/), all of the
issues have now been sorted out (or at least as sorted out as they'll ever be),
so it offered another compelling reason to take a long trip. And so it was that
I booked the 5th to 12th of July off of work and embarked on a 3,378 mile
(5,436km) drive from Redmond, Washington through Oregon, Idaho, and Nevada to
Utah, and then back home through Arizona, Nevada, California and Oregon.
<!-- more --> Here's a map of my travels:

<iframe style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; display: block;"
width="640" height="480" frameborder="0" scrolling="no"
src="https://www.google.com/maps?f=d&amp;source=s_d&amp;saddr=Redmond,+WA&amp;daddr=Ritzville,+WA+to:Palouse+Falls+State+Park,+LaCrosse,+WA+to:Haines,+OR+to:Ontario,+OR+to:Wendover,+UT+to:Salt+Lake+City,+UT+to:Price,+UT+to:Moab,+UT+to:Panguitch,+UT+to:Bryce+Canyon,+UT+to:Springdale,+UT+to:Las+Vegas,+NV+to:Dyer,+NV+to:Benton,+CA+to:Bishop,+CA+to:Markleeville,+CA+to:South+Lake+Tahoe,+CA+to:Carson+City,+NV+to:Susanville,+CA+to:Canby,+CA+to:Klamath+Falls,+Klamath,+Oregon+to:Chemult,+OR+to:Eugene,+OR+to:Redmond,+WA&amp;hl=en&amp;geocode=FYRy1wId2JK4-Ckj7gAgrQyQVDHyBNjF6pADXg%3BFUwbzwIdOarx-Cmb_TdgfN6eVDGKuOf1VucGOQ%3BFXwQyAIdFwz0-CkXG2oYq06fVDGw6S4EkKK6_g%3BFa5LrQIdc2X4-Clr08thkZOkVDGAPiLIJ8MbBw%3BFbjKnwIdhkkH-SlhZ8uqq4-vVDHFV5TAbv6xQg%3BFYCZbQId-uwz-SlbggcPCiOsgDFAv8ZD7CXJhw%3BFcv1bQIdma1U-SntMdGIlD1ShzHKMU1IoLdTWw%3BFTI9XAIdpSll-Sk_ePOC87dOhzHkJtf6O7z9QQ%3BFQSVTAId8WZ4-SmNLbia5eFHhzEtxNXxerEyCw%3BFSMhQQIdzF1M-SlZsMjUUlW1gDGPfBr3uWtgAg%3BFZwpPgId8XRQ-SltTDjuH2k1hzFi_Ul6bDecdQ%3BFQd1NwIdacdD-SnxHlELNo3KgDF6CLeupWSy2Q%3BFdYQJwIdMJoi-SnRffWkgre-gDGjebPV5tXMOg%3BFfPBPgIdIXT2-Clj39bFIHq-gDEMJ1Cg5SDCsw%3BFdsSQQIdIzHw-CkBpiOK-e-9gDFAoqtCLJMezg%3BFVQfOgIdGm_x-CkHZKaeARa-gDEWiemVTR7NEw%3BFVtrTgIdnU7c-Ck_J4MkUt2ZgDGZ0jQuDCeK4A%3BFRYtUgIdHUvZ-CnhT6XuiYWZgDGOkSP7Ri8b3Q%3BFZaXVQIdlX7c-ClxtN74oQqZgDEoOOK9gmyc9w%3BFRy0aAIdMvvO-Cnjvjba6nOdgDFu6A8iyUwHSQ%3BFcNheAIdnKrL-Cm9G9OwH3bMVDFsdmDifBnJjQ%3BFeNMhAIdWsK9-CnjDvJoWdTIVDEml7ko9X-N9A%3BFYZukwId7r29-ClVjg3U4LDHVDGC_tGKBsUjTQ%3BFWUuoAIdXtip-CkZGVCssBnBVDFNiUNKiWHsVw%3BFYRy1wId2JK4-Ckj7gAgrQyQVDHyBNjF6pADXg&amp;aq=&amp;sll=47.116869,-118.344212&amp;sspn=0.070324,0.154324&amp;mra=ls&amp;ie=UTF8&amp;t=m&amp;ll=41.902277,-116.323242&amp;spn=15.68979,28.125&amp;z=5&amp;output=embed"></iframe>
<div style="margin-right: auto; margin-left: auto; text-align: center;">
<small><a
href="https://www.google.com/maps?f=d&amp;source=embed&amp;saddr=Redmond,+WA&amp;daddr=Ritzville,+WA+to:Palouse+Falls+State+Park,+LaCrosse,+WA+to:Haines,+OR+to:Ontario,+OR+to:Wendover,+UT+to:Salt+Lake+City,+UT+to:Price,+UT+to:Moab,+UT+to:Panguitch,+UT+to:Bryce+Canyon,+UT+to:Springdale,+UT+to:Las+Vegas,+NV+to:Dyer,+NV+to:Benton,+CA+to:Bishop,+CA+to:Markleeville,+CA+to:South+Lake+Tahoe,+CA+to:Carson+City,+NV+to:Susanville,+CA+to:Canby,+CA+to:Klamath+Falls,+Klamath,+Oregon+to:Chemult,+OR+to:Eugene,+OR+to:Redmond,+WA&amp;hl=en&amp;geocode=FYRy1wId2JK4-Ckj7gAgrQyQVDHyBNjF6pADXg%3BFUwbzwIdOarx-Cmb_TdgfN6eVDGKuOf1VucGOQ%3BFXwQyAIdFwz0-CkXG2oYq06fVDGw6S4EkKK6_g%3BFa5LrQIdc2X4-Clr08thkZOkVDGAPiLIJ8MbBw%3BFbjKnwIdhkkH-SlhZ8uqq4-vVDHFV5TAbv6xQg%3BFYCZbQId-uwz-SlbggcPCiOsgDFAv8ZD7CXJhw%3BFcv1bQIdma1U-SntMdGIlD1ShzHKMU1IoLdTWw%3BFTI9XAIdpSll-Sk_ePOC87dOhzHkJtf6O7z9QQ%3BFQSVTAId8WZ4-SmNLbia5eFHhzEtxNXxerEyCw%3BFSMhQQIdzF1M-SlZsMjUUlW1gDGPfBr3uWtgAg%3BFZwpPgId8XRQ-SltTDjuH2k1hzFi_Ul6bDecdQ%3BFQd1NwIdacdD-SnxHlELNo3KgDF6CLeupWSy2Q%3BFdYQJwIdMJoi-SnRffWkgre-gDGjebPV5tXMOg%3BFfPBPgIdIXT2-Clj39bFIHq-gDEMJ1Cg5SDCsw%3BFdsSQQIdIzHw-CkBpiOK-e-9gDFAoqtCLJMezg%3BFVQfOgIdGm_x-CkHZKaeARa-gDEWiemVTR7NEw%3BFVtrTgIdnU7c-Ck_J4MkUt2ZgDGZ0jQuDCeK4A%3BFRYtUgIdHUvZ-CnhT6XuiYWZgDGOkSP7Ri8b3Q%3BFZaXVQIdlX7c-ClxtN74oQqZgDEoOOK9gmyc9w%3BFRy0aAIdMvvO-Cnjvjba6nOdgDFu6A8iyUwHSQ%3BFcNheAIdnKrL-Cm9G9OwH3bMVDFsdmDifBnJjQ%3BFeNMhAIdWsK9-CnjDvJoWdTIVDEml7ko9X-N9A%3BFYZukwId7r29-ClVjg3U4LDHVDGC_tGKBsUjTQ%3BFWUuoAIdXtip-CkZGVCssBnBVDFNiUNKiWHsVw%3BFYRy1wId2JK4-Ckj7gAgrQyQVDHyBNjF6pADXg&amp;aq=&amp;sll=47.116869,-118.344212&amp;sspn=0.070324,0.154324&amp;mra=ls&amp;ie=UTF8&amp;t=m&amp;ll=41.902277,-116.323242&amp;spn=15.68979,28.125&amp;z=5"
style="color:#0000FF;text-align:center">View Larger Map</a></small>
</div>

The first couple days of my trip were uneventful and consisted mostly of a lot
of driving. I took the scenic route through Washington and stopped to check out
the I-90 Vantage Bridge over the Columbia River near the Ginkgo State Petrified
Forest, as well as Palouse Falls in the southeast. I didn't actually get off the
freeway at the Petrified Forest, but from what I could see, it didn't seem to
live up to its name. I didn't see any trees, or indeed any wood, petrified or
not. I'm not sure how a bunch of sand and scrub grass qualify as a forest. On
the bright side, the view from the rest area on the I-90 east of the river was
pretty spectacular.

Palouse Falls was a lot more impressive. Depending on conditions, the falls are
up to 200 feet (61 metres) high. Some crazy person named Tyler Bradt recently
[survived going over the falls in a kayak](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mrveNdW_sj0)&mdash;uninjured,
even! The view from the state park campground isn't ideal, but I didn't have
time to find a way down to the river and back up, so I continued on to Haines,
Oregon, where I caught some decent Fourth of July fireworks, and then spent the
night in Ontario, Oregon.

{% gallery %}
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-1.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-1.jpg]: Vantage Bridge rest area
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-2.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-2.jpg]: Vantage Bridge rest area
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-3.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-3.jpg]: Iron horses at the Vantage Bridge rest area
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-4.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-4.jpg]: Iron horses at the Vantage Bridge rest area

/images/utah/utah-part1-album-5.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-5.jpg]: Iron horses at the Vantage Bridge rest area

/images/utah/utah-part1-album-6.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-6.jpg]: Iron horses at the Vantage Bridge rest area

/images/utah/utah-part1-album-7.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-7.jpg]: Palouse Falls State Park, WA. I didn't see any rattlesnakes.
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-8.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-8.jpg]: Palouse Falls
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-9.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-9.jpg]: Palouse Falls
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-10.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-10.jpg]: Palouse Falls
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-11.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-11.jpg]: Palouse Falls
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-12.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-12.jpg]: Palouse Falls
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-13.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-13.jpg]: A ground squirrel (I think) at Palouse Falls State Park
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-14.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-14.jpg]: Palouse Falls
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-15.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-15.jpg]: Sunset somewhere in Oregon
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-16.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-16.jpg]: Sunset somewhere in Oregon
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-17.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-17.jpg]: Fourth of July fireworks in Haines, Oregon
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-18.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-18.jpg]: Fourth of July fireworks in Haines, Oregon
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-19.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-19.jpg]: Fourth of July fireworks in Haines, Oregon
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-20.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-20.jpg]: Fourth of July fireworks in Haines, Oregon
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-21.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-21.jpg]: Fourth of July fireworks in Haines, Oregon
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-22.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-22.jpg]: Fourth of July fireworks in Haines, Oregon
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-23.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-23.jpg]: Fourth of July fireworks in Haines, Oregon
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-24.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-24.jpg]: Fourth of July fireworks in Haines, Oregon
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-25.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-25.jpg]: Fourth of July fireworks in Haines, Oregon
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-26.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-26.jpg]: Fourth of July fireworks in Haines, Oregon
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-27.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-27.jpg]: Fourth of July fireworks in Haines, Oregon
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-28.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-28.jpg]: Fourth of July fireworks in Haines, Oregon
{% endgallery %}

On the second day I drove through Idaho, Nevada and Utah. The tag line on
Idaho's license plates is "Scenic Idaho," and while I don't doubt that it's true
of some parts of the state, it's probably not referring to the southwestern bit.
Other than some cool gorges, there wasn't much to see. I stopped at Malad Gorge
State Park to take a few photos, and then continued on to Wendover, Utah, where
the Bonneville Salt Flats are located.

I was looking forward to driving on the salt flats and trying to hit my car's
top speed of 158mph (254km/h), but unfortunately it had been raining before I
arrived and the flats were covered in a thin layer of water. I drove around a
little bit anyway to put my car's AWD system to the test, but I didn't go very
fast or venture very far from the paved road&mdash;it's not recommended to drive
on the salt flats when they're flooded as it becomes very easy to get stuck,
apparently in some cases to the point that your vehicle becomes unrecoverable.
I'll have to go back to the salt flats another time when they're dry, but at any
rate, they were still very pretty and it was fun to get my car a bit dirty.

Continuing on from the Salt Flats, I drove through Salt Lake City, which is
absolutely beautiful. As I drove in from the west, the sunset painted the
mountains to the east of the city brilliant red, and a thunderstorm in Provo to
the south periodically lit the sky with flashes of lighting. Sadly, I didn't
have time to find a vantage point to get any pictures of this, as it was
starting to get dark and I still had a few hours of driving ahead of me. I
stopped for dinner in Salt Lake City and then continued on to Price, Utah, where
I spent the night.

{% gallery %}
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-29.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-29.jpg]: Malad Gorge State Park, ID
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-30.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-30.jpg]: Malad Gorge State Park, ID
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-31.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-31.jpg]: Malad Gorge State Park, ID
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-32.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-32.jpg]: Malad Gorge State Park, ID
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-33.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-33.jpg]: Malad Gorge State Park, ID
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-34.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-34.jpg]: Malad Gorge State Park, ID
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-35.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-35.jpg]: Malad Gorge State Park, ID
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-36.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-36.jpg]: Malad Gorge State Park, ID
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-37.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-37.jpg]: Bonneville Salt Flats, UT
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-38.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-38.jpg]: Bonneville Salt Flats, UT
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-39.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-39.jpg]: Bonneville Salt Flats, UT
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-40.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-40.jpg]: Bonneville Salt Flats, UT
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-41.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-41.jpg]: Bonneville Salt Flats, UT
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-42.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-42.jpg]: Bonneville Salt Flats, UT
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-43.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-43.jpg]: Bonneville Salt Flats, UT
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-44.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-44.jpg]: Bonneville Salt Flats, UT
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-45.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-45.jpg]: Bonneville Salt Flats, UT
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-46.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-46.jpg]: Bonneville Salt Flats, UT
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-47.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-47.jpg]: Bonneville Salt Flats, UT
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-48.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-48.jpg]: Bonneville Salt Flats, UT
{% endgallery %}

The third day of my trip was Saturday, the 6th of July, and I arrived in Moab,
Utah around noon, where it was already over 100&deg;F (38&deg;C). I checked into
my campsite and explored the town briefly. I was reluctant to go hiking in the
oppressive heat, but it showed no signs of letting up before dusk, so I bought
several bottles of water and Powerade and headed to Arches National Park.

Arches is remarkably beautiful. Of all the places I visited on my trip, it was
second only to Zion National Park. Even if I had gone to Zion first, Arches
still would have been amazing, but as I hadn't yet been to Zion it was truly awe
inspiring. Arches is also a very accessible national park; the scenic drive
through the park alone is impressive, and many of the most impressive arches
require only short hikes to see up close. That said, for someone from a northern
climate such as myself, a two mile hike in 100-degree heat is a lot harder than
one might expect.

I started with Landscape Arch, which was suitably picturesque and monumental for
my first arch. From there, I tried to continue on to Double O Arch, which is
further along the same trail. But between the extreme heat and a harsh wind that
coated my face, eyes, mouth and camera with orange-red sand, I decided to turn
back before I reached Double O Arch; with so many other arches to see, I didn't
want to exhaust myself visiting the first few arches. I stopped at Pine Tree
Arch and Tunnel Arch on the way back. Tunnel Arch is aptly named because it's
really more of a hole through a large fin of rock, on its way to becoming an
arch but not quite there yet. Pine Tree Arch was nice, but difficult to
photograph without a wide angle lens.

I then made the short hikes to Skyline Arch and Sand Dune Arch, the latter of
which is one of the most picturesque arches in the park, in my opinion. Being in
a canyon, the soft sand around the arch is also delightfully cool on a hot day.
Were it not so busy, it would be the perfect place for a nap. Behind the arch,
there's a crevice that one can easily walk into for a change of perspective, and
it's quite easy to climb onto the top of the arch as well.

Finally, with sunset coming on, I hiked up to Delicate Arch. I waited until the
sun had gone down to try to get some long exposures, but I was mostly
unsuccessful, partly for lack of skill and partly because I didn't have all of
the equipment I needed. Most importantly, I didn't have a remote shutter
trigger, which meant I could only take long exposures on a timer, limiting me to
a maximum exposure length of 30 seconds. I resolved to come back again to try to
get some night time and sunrise shots after buying a remote shutter trigger.

{% gallery %}
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-49.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-49.jpg]: Just outside of Arches National Park, UT
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-50.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-50.jpg]: Just outside of Arches National Park, UT
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-51.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-51.jpg]: Just outside of Arches National Park, UT
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-52.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-52.jpg]: The picnic area near the Landscape Arch trailhead
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-53.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-53.jpg]: The picnic area near the Landscape Arch trailhead
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-54.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-54.jpg]: Stone formations along the Landscape Arch trail
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-55.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-55.jpg]: Along the Landscape Arch trail
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-56.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-56.jpg]: Soft orange-red sand in a narrow canyon along the Landscape Arch trail
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-57.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-57.jpg]: A cactus! It's a novelty for me to see them growing in the wild
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-58.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-58.jpg]: Panorama of the desert along the Landscape Arch trail
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-59.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-59.jpg]: These rock formations are completely unlike anything I'm used to
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-60.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-60.jpg]: Landscape Arch! The first of many arches I saw.
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-61.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-61.jpg]: Landscape Arch
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-62.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-62.jpg]: More cacti
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-63.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-63.jpg]: These trails are actually quite tiring to hike on; much energy is expended moving the soft sand
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-64.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-64.jpg]: I love the way the sand looks, though, and it feels very nice as well. I wish the beaches in Washington had such soft sand.
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-65.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-65.jpg]: Landscape Arch
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-66.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-66.jpg]: Landscape Arch panorama
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-67.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-67.jpg]: Landscape Arch
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-68.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-68.jpg]: Desert
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-69.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-69.jpg]: I'm not sure if this formation has a name
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-70.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-70.jpg]: Check out the mountains in the distance. Apparently they're very nice for hiking.
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-71.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-71.jpg]: Looking down from along the Double O Arch trail as a visitor approaches Landscape Arch
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-72.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-72.jpg]: Panorama from along the Double O Arch trail.  This is about where I turned back.
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-73.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-73.jpg]: Tunnel Arch
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-74.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-74.jpg]: Tunnel Arch
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-75.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-75.jpg]: Pine Tree Arch
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-76.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-76.jpg]: Pine Tree Arch
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-78.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-78.jpg]: Pine Tree Arch
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-77.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-77.jpg]: Desert brush
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-79.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-79.jpg]: So much novel flora to see. I like the color contrast between the plant and the sand.
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-80.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-80.jpg]: Many of the larger trees in the area are dead, presumably for lack of water
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-81.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-81.jpg]: Desert landscape
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-82.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-82.jpg]: The colours are otherworldly
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-83.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-83.jpg]: Back at the Landscape Arch trailhead. Check out the mountains in the distance.
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-84.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-84.jpg]: Back at the Landscape Arch trailhead. Check out the mountains in the distance.
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-85.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-85.jpg]: Devil's Garden
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-86.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-86.jpg]: Ominous
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-87.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-87.jpg]: To the northwest, God Rays break through threatening clouds
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-88.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-88.jpg]: But to the south, it's mostly blue sky
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-89.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-89.jpg]: I couldn't resist throwing a few shots of my car in
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-90.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-90.jpg]: The sky was even more amazing in person
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-91.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-91.jpg]: Again, here my photography skills simply don't do the landscape justice
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-92.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-92.jpg]: Skyline Arch
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-93.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-93.jpg]: Skyline Arch
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-94.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-94.jpg]: The canyon beneath Skyline Arch
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-95.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-95.jpg]: Returning along the Skyline Arch trail, there's more picturesque sand
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-96.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-96.jpg]: Looking toward the Skyline Arch trailhead
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-97.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-97.jpg]: Sand Dune Arch. Besides Delicate Arch, this is my favourite arch.
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-98.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-98.jpg]: Sand Dune Arch
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-99.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-99.jpg]: It should be obvious where Sand Dune Arch got its name
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-100.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-100.jpg]: Sand Dune Arch
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-101.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-101.jpg]: Looking out of the Sand Dune Arch canyon entrance
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-102.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-102.jpg]: The sky just got progressively more beautiful as the sun set
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-103.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-103.jpg]: Panorama near the Sand Dune Arch trailhead
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-104.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-104.jpg]: Near the Delicate Arch trailhead. Night was coming on quickly as I set off on my first hike to Delicate Arch.
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-105.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-105.jpg]: To the east, the red cliffs glow with the sun's last rays
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-109.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-109.jpg]: In the distance, what I believe is one of the Windows Arches is visible
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-106.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-106.jpg]: And back to the west, the horizon is on fire
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-107.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-107.jpg]
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-108.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-108.jpg]
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-110.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-110.jpg]
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-111.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-111.jpg]
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-112.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-112.jpg]
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-113.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-113.jpg]
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-114.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-114.jpg]: I stayed by Delicate Arch until darkness fell. I wasn't able to get any good sunset photos of the arch itself, but I did get a decent long exposure of cars heading back to Moab for the night.
{% endgallery %}

Back at my tent as I was getting ready for bed that evening, I left the door
flap open for probably about a minute or two while I moved some of my gear from
the car into the tent.  Upon getting in the tent and turning on my flashlight, I
discovered that that minute or two had been long enough for a
[solfugid](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solifugae) to invite itself in. My dad
is an entomologist so I'm not particularly frightened of insects or arachnids,
though I'm certainly not as welcoming of them as he is, nor, obviously, as
knowledgeable about them. The solfugid was pretty alarming because at the time I
didn't actually know what it was; I only knew that it was very fast and had very
large mandibles, and that Utah (in contrast to everywhere I've ever lived) does
actually have venomous arthropods.

After a lot of swearing and awkward attempts to keep my eye on its rapid
confused scurrying while blindly reaching for something that I could safely trap
it in, I managed to scoop it up in a cooking pot and throw it outside. I then
searched the Internet for something like "insect with 10 legs with 2 huge front
legs" and found out what it was, and that they're relatively harmless.  (When I
talked to my dad about it later, he was quick to point out that solfugids are
arachnids, not insects, and that the two front "legs" aren't actually legs at
all. He also said that he was jealous of my encounter as he's never seen one in
the wild.) I still wouldn't want to get bitten by those big mandibles, though.

<div style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; text-align: center">
{% photo /images/utah/utah-part1-album-115.jpg /images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-115.jpg A solfugid in my tent %}
</div>

Sunday was just as crushingly hot as Saturday had been (and, indeed, as the
entire next week would be). To cool down during the hottest part of the day, I
took a trip up the Colorado River with [Moab Jett](http://www.moabjett.com/). I
didn't find the scenery all that remarkable, but the trip was nevertheless a lot
of fun and very refreshingly cool. Because it is a jet boat with no external
propeller, by maintaining a high rate of speed the boat is able to skim over
water only a few inches deep, and at various points on the tour the captain puts
the boat into a spin, soaking everyone on board with refreshing river water. In
retrospect, I could easily have brought my phone along in a couple ZipLoc bags
for photos, but at the time I wasn't sure just how wet the tour would be; hence,
there are no photos.

After the jet boat tour I decided to check out Dead Horse Point State Park. I
should mention at this point that I had been using my car's built-in GPS to
navigate throughout the trip. It has a couple nice features such as the ability
to input multiple waypoints on the way to a destination, but other than that,
it's pretty bad and is one of my few significant complaints about the car. It
does a poor job of choosing optimal routes relative to software like Bing,
Google or Apple Maps, and is abysmal at estimating how long a drive will take.
And, as I discovered, it also has a pretty broad definition of what qualifies as
a road.

Mapping a route from Moab to Dead Horse Point, I was presented with two options,
and I chose the "alternate" route which I thought would be a more scenic drive.
And indeed it was&mdash;but it also turned out to traverse Long Canyon Road, a
somewhat steep and rocky 4x4 trail from the Colorado River basin up to the Dead
Horse Point mesa. There are settings in the GPS to enable or disable routing
through major highways and toll roads, so I'm surprised that there's no way to
filter out dirt roads (and that such an option isn't turned on by default), but
I wasn't actually bothered about it taking me on a 4x4 trail; I figured it would
be another good chance to try out my Subaru AWD.

The clearance of my car is too low for serious offroading, and my "performance"
street tires don't have the grip necessary for steep sandy slopes, but
nevertheless my car performed admirably. I saw a few trucks and SUVs on the
trail, but I didn't encounter any other cars. I drove up to just beyond  the
giant fallen rock before Pucker Pass, at which point the road was fairly steep
and covered in extremely soft sand which afforded my tires almost no traction. I
think I probably could have made it through and continued to the end of the
trail, but as I was alone, dozens of miles from the nearest city, and with no
cellular reception, I didn't want to push my luck, so I turned around and went
back down the canyon and back to the interstate. (I feel like I'm letting other
Subaru owners down by admitting that, but better safe than sorry!) The road
probably doesn't look that bad in my photos, and it wouldn't be for a vehicle
with proper tires and more clearance, but keep in mind that the places I stopped
for pictures were the least steep and bumpy parts.

As an aside, on my way back, right by the intersection of Long Canyon Road and
the highway, I saw a large matte black Ford truck with a huge stabilized camera
rig on the back, as well as a Mustang with fake bullet holes and a missing
taillight on a flatbed tow truck. Clearly filming for some movie was going on in
the area. Fast & The Furious 7? Transformers 4? Who knows.

Finally, more than an hour later than I had expected to, I arrived at Dead Horse
Point. The view of the Colorado River from Dead Horse Point is well worth the
drive, but once you've seen it, there's not much else to do in the state park,
so I didn't spend too long there. As I was leaving, a beautiful but ephemeral
rainbow presented itself to the east, punctuated by flashes of lightning from a
storm that had  rolled in to the east of Moab. Sadly I couldn't get any decent
pictures of this.

{% gallery %}
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-116.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-116.jpg]: I am too Canadian for this kind of heat
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-117.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-117.jpg]: Long Canyon Road
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-118.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-118.jpg]: Long Canyon Road
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-119.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-119.jpg]: Long Canyon Road
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-120.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-120.jpg]: Long Canyon Road
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-121.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-121.jpg]: Long Canyon Road
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-122.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-122.jpg]: Long Canyon Road
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-123.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-123.jpg]: Long Canyon Road
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-125.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-125.jpg]: Long Canyon Road
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-144.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-144.jpg]: Dusty!
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-124.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-124.jpg]: It's a rough road, but it does offer quite the view
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-126.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-126.jpg]: Again, the mountains in the distance demonstrate the diversity of Utah's geology
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-127.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-127.jpg]: Not to mention its beauty
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-128.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-128.jpg]: Looking back down at where Long Canyon Road meets the highway
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-129.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-129.jpg]: Panorama from Dead Horse Point
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-130.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-130.jpg]: Potash ponds in the distance as seen from Dead Horse Point. They're kind of an unnatural blight on the pristine desert landscape, but on the other hand, their radiant blue colour makes them actually kind of pretty.
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-131.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-131.jpg]: A nameless road cuts through the desert landscape
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-132.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-132.jpg]: Dead Horse Point
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-133.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-133.jpg]: The view from Dead Horse Point
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-134.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-134.jpg]: The view from Dead Horse Point
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-135.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-135.jpg]: The view from Dead Horse Point
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-136.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-136.jpg]: The view from Dead Horse Point
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-137.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-137.jpg]: It's me!
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-138.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-138.jpg]: The view from Dead Horse Point
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-139.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-139.jpg]: Another shot of the potash ponds
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-140.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-140.jpg]: Another angle from Dead Horse Point
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-141.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-141.jpg]: Another Dead Horse Point panorama
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-142.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-142.jpg]: An observation deck atop Dead Horse Point
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-143.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-143.jpg]: Just beyond the deck, the sheer rock wall drops thousands of feet to the canyon floor
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-145.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-145.jpg]: Near Canyonlands National Park, with a storm brewing beyond Moab to the northeast
{% endgallery %}

Earlier in the day I had picked up a remote shutter trigger for my camera from a
small photography store in Moab, so with my resolution to return to Delicate
Arch for sunrise in mind, I went to bed as early as the heat would allow. I woke
up around 3:30am on Monday and drove back out to Arches. Equipped with a
flashlight, my camera and tripod, and my new shutter trigger, I hiked up to the
arch in complete darkness and waited for the sun to rise.

I actually arrived much earlier than I needed to for sunrise, because I had been
hoping to get some photos of the arch with stars behind it. Unfortunately this
is where I discovered another piece of equipment my photography kit is lacking.
Obviously auto-focus doesn't work in low light, let alone complete darkness, but
I discovered that it's also nearly impossible to correctly manually focus on an
object for a long exposure when you can't actually _see the object._ I thought I
might be able to accomplish this by trial and error, but doing so turned out to
be time consuming and unreliable.

I later did some research and discovered that one of the preferred solutions to
this problem is to carry a laser pointer with one's photographic equipment. By
shining the laser on the object you want to focus on, you'll have a small,
bright point, and you'll know that your image is in focus when that point is
readily visible through the viewfinder. While I'm on the subject of photography,
I also learned that on lenses with optical image stabilization, the
stabilization must be turned off for long exposures, or fine movements in the
stabilization mechanism will result in a blurry image.

Anyway, once the sun came up I was able to get some reasonably nice photos,
although I was somewhat compositionally limited by the swarm of people who had
arrived around 6am. Now that I was able to see where I was going, I took the
opportunity to explore the natural stone amphitheatre below the arch, as well as
the jutting outcropping of rock to the south. Here I found a number of lizards
warming themselves in the morning sun.

Returning from Arches, I made a brief stop in Canyonlands National Park to see
the Mesa Arch. Canyonlands is a very big park, which makes it quite time
consuming to explore. I was eager to move on to Bryce Canyon and Zion, so after
seeing the Mesa Arch (which is very impressive and well worth going to
Canyonlands for), I decided to start driving to Panguitch, where I'd check out
Bryce Canyon and spend the night. I'll save the rest for part II, as Bryce
Canyon and Zion National Parks were even more spectacular than Arches and
Canyonlands, and are more than deserving of their own post.

{% gallery %}
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-146.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-146.jpg]: The first light of the morning is just touching the top of Delicate Arch
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-147.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-147.jpg]: Delicate Arch
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-148.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-148.jpg]: Delicate Arch
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-149.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-149.jpg]: The Delicate Arch amphitheatre
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-150.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-150.jpg]: Looking northeast along the trail to Delicate Arch. I was perched in the small rock tunnel (I hesitate to call it a proper arch) northwest of the arch itself.
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-151.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-151.jpg]: A couple other early morning hikers took a seat atop the tall cliff to the southwest to watch the sunrise
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-152.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-152.jpg]: Panorama of Delicate Arch and surroundings
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-153.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-153.jpg]: Here's a (rather poor) shot of my camera setup, in case you were curious
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-155.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-155.jpg]: Looking back at the cliffs I photographed from the trailhead at sunset
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-156.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-156.jpg]: Now the sun is truly beginning to light up the arch
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-157.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-157.jpg]: It's stunning. My photography is by no means excellent, but I doubt any expert could truly capture the majesty of Delicate Arch at sunrise.
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-158.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-158.jpg]: The desert to the northwest
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-159.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-159.jpg]: The overpowering golden glow of the morning sun promises another breathtakingly hot day
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-160.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-160.jpg]: I climbed up above the tunnel where my camera and tripod were sitting to take this. In the lower left is the trail.
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-161.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-161.jpg]: Delicate Arch again, now roughly half lit by the morning sun
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-162.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-162.jpg]: The desert and mountains are also beautiful in the morning light
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-163.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-163.jpg]: Delicate Arch
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-164.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-164.jpg]: Delicate Arch
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-165.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-165.jpg]: A panorama of the trail to the north
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-166.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-166.jpg]: Delicate Arch
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-168.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-168.jpg]: Delicate Arch
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-169.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-169.jpg]: A panorama of the amphitheatre from south of the arch
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-170.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-170.jpg]: More cacti!
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-171.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-171.jpg]: A lizard basking in the morning sun
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-172.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-172.jpg]: It kept its eye on me, but seem relatively unconcerned with my presence
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-173.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-173.jpg]: Another one! They were all over the place
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-174.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-174.jpg]: The sunrise was basically over by the time I arrived at Mesa Arch, but it was still lit quite spectacularly
/images/utah/utah-part1-album-175.jpg[/images/utah/utah-part1-thumb-175.jpg]: Mesa Arch
{% endgallery %}
