---
layout: post
title: "Game Review: The Elder Scrolls Online"
date: 2014-05-18 21:02
comments: true
categories: [Reviews]
---

[**Updated March 17, 2015:** The Elder Scrolls Online: Tamriel Unlimited was officially released
today, meaning that ESO no longer requires a subscription fee to play. In addition, there have been
six major content updates since the game's original release, with dozens upon dozens of
improvements. I'd encourage you to [read my new post on the subject](/entry/2015/03/17/windows-hello/)
or just go straight to Zenimax Online Studios'
[own announcement](http://www.elderscrollsonline.com/en-us/news/post/2015/03/17/welcome-to-tamriel-unlimited).]

It has been about a month and a half now since The Elder Scrolls Online was
released, and it's received
[generally mixed reviews](http://www.metacritic.com/game/pc/the-elder-scrolls-online).
Despite some undeniable technical issues and a handful of design flaws, it's a
great game and more than a bit underrated in my opinion; if you're a fan of The
Elder Scrolls _or_ an MMO aficionado, you owe it to yourself to give ESO a try.
I'll explain why.

First, by way of qualifications, I should mention my history with the Elder
Scrolls series. I didn't play Arena or Daggerfall, so I haven't been following
the series since its inception, but Morrowind captured hundreds of hours worth
of my attention and made a huge impression on my taste in games&mdash;it was
unlike anything I'd ever played at the time, and not even other Elder Scrolls
games have quite managed to recapture that magic for me.  Oblivion was, at
first, quite awe-inspiring, but once the captivating new graphics wore thin, it
ultimately seemed shallow and uninspired compared to Morrowind. Skyrim was a
return to form, with better and more varied environments, a more interesting
story, and improvements to game mechanics all around&mdash;in addition to, once
again, remarkable visuals. In short, I've been an Elder Scrolls fan for more
than 12 years now, so although I don't go _all the way_ back, I have a good
basis for comparison.

The Elder Scrolls Online came as a surprise, being announced less than a year
after Todd Howard indicated that
[Bethesda had no interest in an Elder Scrolls MMO](http://massively.joystiq.com/2011/08/31/bethesdas-todd-howard-not-interested-in-an-elder-scrolls-mmo/).
In fact, at that point ESO had been in development for four years, but Howard
may not have known and certainly would not have been at liberty to reveal that.
At any rate, my initial reaction was extreme skepticism; I doubted that the best
aspects of The Elder Scrolls could be preserved when introduced to the MMO
formula. As more details were revealed about the game's design and mechanics, I
grew more interested, but I after playing the beta I was again left with
lukewarm impressions. Still, something about it kept nagging at me, and I
couldn't stop watching Twitch streams of ESO as launch drew nearer. Eventually,
I decided to buy it just in time for early launch. Since then, I've put in
nearly 150 hours, and that number would doubtless be much higher were it not for
the obligations of the real world.
<!-- more -->

There are a few things that the Elder Scrolls Online actually does much better
than any of the previous Elder Scrolls games, and if you've any experience with
other MMOs, they'll likely come as a big surprise. One is the quests: they're
better written, more engaging, and more meaningful than those in previous Elder
Scrolls games, and in fact most games in general. The aggressive use of phasing
(an MMO technique which allows many players to co-exist in different versions of
the same space) allows your actions to actually have a lasting, visible
effect on the world, to an even greater extent than I can recall seeing in
previous Elder Scrolls games.

When you're given a quest to liberate a city from the clutches of the enemy du
jour, for instance, you'll _actually_ liberate the city, cleansing the streets
of marauding monsters and opening up new shops and questgivers. Phasing is not a
novel concept, but I've never seen it used so extensively or to such great
effect, and it really makes quests feel much more worthwhile than the typical
MMO tropes of _slaughter 10 pigs_ or _collect 8 doodads_. Even when the
underlying quest mechanic is no more complex than one of those, the presentation
in ESO makes it _feel_ much more interesting, and to a large extent, that's what
counts.

There are also actual moral choices in The Elder Scrolls Online. The game
doesn't yet offer the opportunity to steal from or kill NPCs and possibly face
the consequences as previous Elder Scrolls games have (though Zenimax promises
that they are planning such a feature), but many quests offer compelling moral
dilemmas. Will you allow the willing sacrifice of a loyal servant to cure a Duke
infected with lycanthropy? Will you show mercy to a traitor, knowing that your
choice could come back to haunt you? Will you use a powerful Necromantic
artifact to bolster the strength of your faction's army and possibly save the
lives of many soldiers, or will you destroy it lest it fall into the wrong hands
and lead to many more deaths?

The outcomes of these choices are never Earth-shattering (Nirn-shattering?), and
their effects on gameplay are varied, but they're more believable and relatable
than the choices in most games touted for their "morality systems." There is no
omnipotent force here tallying up your Karmic balance and changing the colour of
your robes depending on whether you've been good or bad. Instead, your choices
may determine whether certain NPCs live or die, or simply how they perceive you.
It sounds minor, but as some of the NPCs are recurring throughout the storyline,
the results of choices you make early in the game are often reflected later on.
More importantly, the moral choices in ESO are often actually _difficult_
because both options have costs associated with them, or because making the
upstanding choice means more work or less reward. Such is the morality of real
life; it's complicated and difficult because there's isn't always a good option,
and virtuous choices often involve sacrifice. Very few games, even among those
praised for excellent narratives, get this right, so to see it done so well in
an MMO (a genre not known for good storytelling) is a pleasant surprise.

ESO has largely have the same cast of voice actors that have been utilized in
previous games, and overuse of some actors is a problem as always, but on the
whole I'm impressed at how much content Zenimax was able to include while still
providing full voiceovers for all of the NPC dialogue. This is one of the things
that I didn't know I wanted until I actually experienced it, but it really makes
a huge difference in how interested I am in the story and the quests. I've
played several MMOs, including World of Warcraft for more than 7 years, and I've
never before bothered to actually read the quest text. In The Elder Scrolls
Online, I am not only listening to the quest dialogue, but I'm also taking the
time to listen to supplemental NPC dialogue. It's well written and mostly pretty
well-acted, and there's a lot of good humour to be found as well.  Excellent
performances by big names like Michael Gambon, John Cleese and Jennifer Hale
make the main quest lines a real pleasure, too.

Of course, all of this would be for naught without solid game mechanics, and
fortunately ESO excels there, too. Combat mechanics have always been something
of a weak point for The Elder Scrolls series. Each new iteration improves on the
last, but conversely, each time one goes back to an older Elder Scrolls game one
wonders how he or she ever put up with it. Even as each new game brings
significant improvements, Bethesda has never quite captured a real sense of
weight and solidity in their combat mechanics. In contrast to (for instance)
Dark Souls, where the impact of each slash and thrust can almost be felt through
the controller, swordfighting in The Elder Scrolls often feels like swinging a
tennis racket through empty air.

Being an MMO, ESO's combat can't compete with the likes of Dark Souls, either... 
but it feels surprisingly good. It's more fast-paced and dynamic than combat
ever has been in The Elder Scrolls, requiring a strategic approach and an
attentive eye to take on groups of enemies, particularly in the Veteran Ranks.
Weapon attacks feel good, with real differentiation between various type of
weapons, and the available abilities are varied enough to keep things
interesting.

The skill system in ESO is a nice change from MMO orthodoxy, being a blend of
the prescribed, XP-based systems seen in other games and the more open-ended
approach that The Elder Scrolls is known for, where skills are levelled up by
using them. Basically, there are a few skill lines unique to each of the game's
four classes, but there are many more that can be unlocked by any character.
Skill points are unlocked in a number of ways, including through levelling up
with XP, but how you can invest them is dictated by how far you've advanced each
of your skill trees (which happens primarily by using the skills in the tree).
It might sound complex, but it's actually fairly intuitive in practice, and it
works quite well overall.

Of course, combat has never really been the focus of The Elder Scrolls, so many
will wonder whether ESO lives up to the standard of boundless exploration set by
previous games in the series. The answer is no; while I find the term a bit
distasteful, ESO could fairly be called a "themepark" MMO, and although there's
lots of world to explore, character progression through different zones is very
linear. In that respect, fans who enjoy The Elder Scrolls primarily for the open
world aspect may be disappointed. But there are a few ways in which I think ESO
makes up for it.

The first is delves, or public dungeons. These are much the same as the
dungeons, caves and ruins one can explore in other Elder Scrolls games. They are
littered across the overworld, and although they often offer quests, no quest or
NPC interaction is typically required to access them&mdash;they're best found
through exploration. In MMO terms, they're similar to instanced dungeons, with a
miniboss at the end that may drop higher-quality loot, but they're open to
everyone and designed to be completed solo. They're surprisingly effective at
breaking up the routine of solo levelling, and they do a lot to make ESO feel
like a real Elder Scrolls game.

Second, and more importantly in my opinion, is the diversity of environments in
ESO. This is another thing Bethesda has never been very good at: they pick a
single province of Tamriel with a single type of terrain and geography, and
while they do a marvelous job of realizing it, their single-minded focus can
lead to game worlds which become stale over time.  Morrowind and Skyrim had
enough variation that this wasn't a huge problem, but Oblivion was _terrible_
for it; everything looked the same, to the extent that exploring eventually felt
pointless.

While not all of Tamriel is yet playable in ESO, the game offers the opportunity
to visit many different provinces, including several that haven't been featured
since the days of Arena and Daggerfall. Along the way, you'll explore
grasslands, forests, rocky spires, deserts, swamps, tundra, and more. Exploring
new zones is a big aspect of what appeals to me about MMOs, and ESO does a much
better job of offering many different types of environments to explore than
previous Elder Scrolls games have. (That said, it's not perfect; in particular,
I wish the Daggerfall Covenant zones had more variation.)

Having said so many positive things about the game, it should be obvious that I
am a huge fan of The Elder Scrolls online, and would highly recommend it to MMO,
RPG and TES fans. There are many more good things I could write that I simply
don't have time to. However, I would be remiss to not also mention the problems
with the game, for there are several, and some of them are significant.

Bugs and performance/latency issues are at the top of the list, unfortunately.
Since the game came out, there have been many, many bugged quests, and although
I can't recall seeing one recently, patch notes and forum threads make it clear
that many still abound. Many class skills are currently bugged; although I don't
play one, I'm told that this is particularly bad for Nightblades. Similarly,
there is an issue with passives not applying properly after your character dies
and resurrects, which is especially annoying in PvP.

ESO offers a weapon switching mechanic, but it's currently quite unreliable
because the amount of time it takes to execute is very inconsistent. This often
leads to accidental double-switches, or failed switches, which in turn
frequently leads to frustrating deaths. And in general, even without a high
ping, I've experienced occasional latency issues which, when they occur, make
combat unpredictable and irritating. This happens most often in large PvP
battles for me, but I understand that latency issues in general are quite common
for European players.

PvP balance is another sore spot. Early on, the game was dominated by vampires,
and although they've now received a well-deserved nerf, I still feel that their
balance could use more attention - not necessarily outright nerfs, but changes,
at least. Werewolves, in contrast, are so weak as to be almost pointless. (Both
lycanthropy and vampirism are "diseases" which any player can contract.) Class
balance is also less than stellar, although I won't go into specifics on that,
as it's a more controversial topic. Of course, this is no surprise in a brand
new MMO. Even World of Warcraft had remarkably poor PvP balance until _at least_
the launch of the Burning Crusade expansion, a full two years after the main
game launched.

Certain game systems, while good in theory, were not particularly well executed.
For instance, when you hit level 50 in ESO, you begin levelling through the
"Veteran Ranks," and are given an opportunity to experience the other factions'
content and quests with levelled up (and generally more challenging) enemies.
Think of it as the MMO version of New Game+. As a recovering alt-a-holic, I like
that this gives me an incentive to experience more of the game's content without
having to roll a new character. But at the same time, because there are few
realistic alternative means of reaching max level, I dislike that it almost
precludes me from trying another class without having to play content I've
already completed. (Experience from monsters is severely reduced in Veteran Rank
content, meaning that grinding is not viable. Hardcore players _hate_ this.) The
fact that you can't choose which enemy faction to visit first is more than a
little bit annoying, too.

There are a host of other, less severe issues, which affect different players to
varying degrees. I'm sure many players have "pet" issues which I've failed to
mention here. I can't say that these issues don't affect the game experience; in
some cases, they can be quite significant. But, like it or not, this is par for
the course for a new MMO. I am confident that Zenimax is carefully monitoring
the game and taking customer feedback into account. Their progress on bug fixes
so far has been acceptable if not stellar (although I'm sure not everyone would
agree), but I think it's clear that the game is stabilizing fairly quickly.
The upcoming content patch should include a number of major fixes that players
have been demanding, which I think will help a great deal.

The Elder Scrolls Online is not for everyone. It's not The Elder Scrolls VI, nor
is it the next World of Warcraft. If you expect either of those things, you will
likely be disappointed. What it is is an adept blend of those aspects that make
The Elder Scrolls great with all of the social, competitive and cooperative
elements that underpin good MMOs. Despite its flaws, I think it's an absolutely
excellent game overall, and one which will surely appeal to most of its target
audience if approached with an open mind. Even if the idea of a $15/month
subscription fee is offputting to you, you can easily experience enough content
in the first month to make the game well worth its $60 box price. I can't
recommend it enough.

Hope to see you in Tamriel!
