---
layout: post
title: "Game Review: Bloodborne"
date: 2015-05-21 00:12:44 -0700
comments: true
categories: [Reviews]
published: False
---

_[I completed this review after playing Bloodborne for approximately 30 hours. I have finished the
game, but I have not discovered 100% of the content. I played the entire game solo, not using any
summons to help with boss fights. I have not yet participated in any PvP.]_

_Bloodborne_ is the spiritual successor to From Software's _Demons Souls_ and _Dark Souls_ series,
and its pedigree is clear right out of the gate. Upon starting the game, you'll enter the character
creation menu and asked to choose from a number of classes with different stats, but given almost no
explanation of what the stats mean or how they affect gameplay. If you're a _Dark Souls_ veteran,
you can make some educated guesses, but new players will be completely on their own. Then, after the
introductory sequence, you're thrown into an open world replete with buildings of impossible scale,
which stretches great distances in each direction. You're completely on your own to make your path
through this world, and there's no obvious "correct" route; in fact, I found that a friend and I had
found different bosses first, because we had taken different routes from the start.

If this experience sounds like it might be frustrating for new players, that's because it absolutely
can be. Even for veterans of the series, the complete lack of guidance can feel punishing at times.
And yet, I can't stress how much I absolutely love it. The freedom not only to explore, but to truly
discover the workings of the world, and to make mistakes, is what made the _Souls_ series what
it was, and _Bloodborne_ continues this legacy. It's a tribute to the days when video games didn't
hold your hand throughout the entire experience, and it's something that none of its contemporaries
capture quite so well.<!-- more -->

Like its predecessors, _Bloodborne_ adeptly balances challenging and sometimes frustrating gameplay
with frequent rewards and other powerful motivators: the prospect of discovering something new, of
overcoming the next challenging boss, of finding the next area, or glimpsing another thread of the
world's deep backstory. These enticements work so well because of the depth and imagination with
which the world is crafted. There's a constant sense of cataclysmic urgency, but you won't truly
understand it until you take the time to understand all of the subtle clues placed throughout the
world. _Bloodborne_ gives you very little, but it trusts you to have the fortitude and curiosity to
work things out for yourself.

Adding to the game's excellent ambiance is its soundtrack, which is absolutely sublime. The _Souls_
series has always had excellent music, but _Bloodborne_ sets a new standard in terms of how
evocative the music is, and how harmonious it is with the world and gameplay. A few prime examples
are the tracks "Micolash, Nightmare Host", and "Lullaby for Mergo". They're excellent pieces in
their own right, but if you've not yet completed the game, I would recommend against listening to
them out of context. Both are so perfectly unsettling and disconcerting; they're thematic matches
for the scenes in which they're used.  And then there's my favorite track,
"[The First Hunter](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3V9zxXN1rx0)," which is beautiful and
melancholy, and paradoxically manages to create the perfect mood by being _just so_ incongruous with
its place in the game.

There's a lot to like about _Bloodborne_. Unfortunately, there are also a few respects in which I
feel it falls short of the mark set by _Dark Souls_ and _Dark Souls II_. First and foremost, the
fact that it's exclusive to the PS4 is a huge disappointment. I should disclose, as always, that I
work for Microsoft, so my opinion here is obviously colored by that. But console exclusives in
general are bad for consumers; they force a choice between spending significant additional, or
missing out on some of the best games the industry has to offer. Some people will never play
_Bloodborne_ simply because they can't afford it, and that's a huge shame.

Perhaps of more concern to those players who already have a PS4, though, is that _Bloodborne_
doesn't even run particularly well on the system. It looks great, to be sure, and the performance
issues are by no means intolerable or game-breaking&mdash;but they're there. Some areas and
graphical effects consistently cause serious stuttering; there are occasional hitches in the sound;
and some textures and models are surprisingly low-definition for a game that should be a showcase
for Sony's next-gen platform. Even worse, load times were absolutely atrocious when I first started
playing, sometimes taking upwards of 40 seconds. The most punishing aspect of each death became not
the potential loss of blood echoes (souls in _Dark Souls_ parlance) or need to backtrack, but the
tedium of having to sit through another 30-plus seconds of load screen. Recent patches seemed to
have reduced load times to a more tolerable level, but it could also be that I've just become used
to the long load times. In any case, the load times are exacerbated by the fact that you can no
longer heal at lanterns (bonfires) without traveling to the Hunter's Dream and incurring yet
another load screen.

In short, _Bloodborne_ should have been available on PC. Despite From Software's initial reluctance
to work with the platform and the shoddy port that _Dark Souls_ received, the PC versions of _Dark
Souls_ and especially _Dark Souls II_ were the definitive editions, with higher and more consistent
framerates, support for multiple screen resolutions, and online gameplay that doesn't require a
monthly fee. The same could no doubt have been said of _Bloodborne_ had it been released on PC, but
alas, it looks like this one is bound to stay a Sony exclusive.

### III

As I mentioned previously, the world of _Bloodborne_ is crafted with a level of care, imagination,
and depth that most other games can't even approach. That said, I get the sense that the extra
fidelity that the Sony's new platform allowed came at a cost in terms of environmental variety. This
is disappointing, because exploring From Software's meticulously constructed and darkly beautiful
worlds has always been one of my favorite aspects of the _Souls_ series. _Dark Souls_ had decaying,
overgrown castles, moonlit forests, fantastic medieval cityscapes, caverns of shining crystals,
fiery magma pits, poisonous swamps, and labyrinthine walkways and hovels spanning impossibly large
chasms. _Dark Souls II_ followed this up with a similarly impressive set of locales, especially if
you include the <acronym title="Downloadable Content">DLC</acronym> packages, all three of which
were excellent. _Bloodborne_, by contrast, has only a handful of environment types. Most of the game
takes place in a twisted and gruesome caricature of Victorian England. In addition to this, there is
a forest overlooking an endless sea, a handful of caves and subterranean areas, a frozen, abandoned
castle, and a couple impressively creepy nightmarescapes. All of these are extremely well imagined
and rendered, but I found myself wishing for the more of the variety that the _Souls_ games offered.

This complaint also extends to the weapons available in the game. _Dark Souls_ and _Dark Souls II_
had dozens upon dozens of different weapons across roughly two dozen different weapon classes. Each
class of weapon had its own characteristics, animations and gameplay style. During a single
playthrough of each game, one was bound to discover many of these weapons, and miss still many more
which were hidden or rare. The huge number of distinct weapons with unique characteristics made it
very likely that you'd switch out your weapon at least a few times during a playthrough as you
discovered new ones that worked better with your playstyle or attribute allocation. In _Bloodborne_,
I discovered only a handful of different weapons, and none of them gave me a compelling reason to
give up the weapon I'd started the game with. I'm know there are others that I have not yet
discovered, but given that I finished the game and completed a number of optional areas, I don't
expect that there are a great number of weapons which I missed.

In general, choices seem much more limited in _Bloodborne_. Another example of this is the covenant
system; whereas _Dark Souls II_ had maybe a dozen or so, _Bloodborne_ has only three, and they're
all more or less the same. And then there are the new randomly-generated "chalice dungeons." The
first few chalice dungeons you explore will be novel and exciting. They were especially so for me as
a software developer, because it was interesting to think about how From Software might have gone
about designing the system, which produces a good variety of layouts while doing a respectable job
of maintaining the illusion that there might have been some reason or purpose in each dungeon's
design. But after those first few dungeons, the experience begins to wear thin: although there are
practically infinite unique layouts to explore, as far as I can tell (having tried two of the four
different chalices), there's really only one tile-set.Â  Thus, the dungeons quickly begin to feel
samey and boring.  There doesn't seem to be a great incentive to explore them from a story or
gameplay perspective either: they are purely optional and don't appear to provide much in the way of
unique loot, so what's the point?

The idea with chalice dungeons, I think, was to add an extra layer of replayability to _Bloodborne_.
But I think the effort backfired. The _Souls_ games have always had very strong speedrun and PvP
communities, which kept the games alive years after their original releases. I expect speedrunners
will largely if not entirely ignore the chalice dungeons, as they're not mandatory, don't offer
especially good loot, and being random, can't be made part of a route or considered objectives for
special categories of runs. The fact that Bloodborne is shorter overall doesn't help either. That's
not to say the game is lacking in content, as it most certainly is not. But whereas it took almost a
year for the world record Dark Souls II speedrun time to drop below 50 minutes, casual speedrunners
are already matching that time in _Bloodborne_. I don't think that bodes well for the game's
longevity. Similarly, while I'm not much of a _Souls_ PvP player, I think the PvP community will be
hurt by the relative dearth of weaponry and the homogenization of playstyles relative to _Dark Souls
II_.

Finally, the difficulty curve in Bloodborne seems... suboptimal. The early game seems to be much
more difficult the later half. To some extent, this is probably a natural consequence of me learning
the new game mechanics and getting better overall as I played more, but I also felt that some of the
early boss fights were more challenging to learn and less forgiving than some of the later fights.
There were at least a couple late-game fights that I beat on the first try, which I don't think ever
happened to me in a _Souls_ game (I'll be honest, I'm not particularly good).

### IV

There are clear improvements to be found as well, though. The addition of a dedicated button for
healing is huge; never again will you miss a crucial heal because you're fumbling around with the
item selector. This is just one of a host of changes designed to make combat quicker and award
aggression more. Some of these changes will be positive or negative depending on your specific
tastes and playstyle, but personally I love pretty much all of them. While there's an undeniable
satisfaction to mastering the slower-paced, more methodical and strategic combat of the _Souls_
games, _Bloodborne_'s emphasis on agility distinguishes it from its predecessors even though it is,
on the whole, actually very similar to them. I don't think that the _Dark Souls_ formula was getting
stale, but _Bloodborne_ makes everything fresh again, and the value in that can't be overstated in
an age of yearly franchises which continue to be churned out like clockwork, long past their primes.

There are also some changes to cooperative and competitive play that will be welcomed by the
community. The much-maligned Soul Memory system from _Dark Souls II_ is gone, which will make it
easier to cooperate with friends and find PvP opponents. At least for the time being, healing is
allowed by invaders, which should finally put an end to the moaning about dishonorable "chuggers."
It does seem a bit unfair to PvE players who get invaded, though; without the advantage of being
exclusively able to heal, they'll be even easier targets for dedicated PvPers. (Side note: I didn't
get invaded a single time during my playthrough, even though I was online the whole time. I have no
idea why this was the case.)Â 

Finally, although I previously complained about its (probable) impact on environmental variety, the
fidelity with which the world was imagined and realized is remarkable to behold. _Souls_ titles have
always been excellent in this regard, but in the past they were built for outdated hardware and
running on, as I understand it, not especially powerful game engines. _Bloodborne_ takes advantage
of newer technology to bring forth a new level of artistry.Â  Every surface is packed with intricate
detail; every object and building is thoughtfully designed to evoke a Gothic-Victorian horrorscape.
And horrifying it is: nobody does grotesque, oppressive creepiness like From Software.

I spent a lot of text discussing the shortcomings that I feel _Bloodborne_ has relative to its
predecessors. I think those statements are reasonable and accurate; I do feel that some aspects of
the game are a step backwards. _Bloodborne_ isn't quite the follow-up to _Dark Souls II_ that I
dreamed of. Whereas _Dark Souls_ and _Dark Souls II_ were damn near perfect, _Bloodborne_ is a fine
work of art, but not quite a masterpiece.

But not everything has to be a masterpiece. I want to make it very clear that despite its flaws, I
absolutely _loved Bloodborne_, and I can't wait to play through it again. It's a hell of an
experience and will easily be a contender for the best game of 2015, despite how early in the year
it was released.  If there's one thing you should take away from this review, it's this: I spent
more than $450 just to play _Bloodborne_, and I'd do it again in a heartbeat.
